First Sunday of Lent
INTROIT - Psalm 90. 15-16
INVOCABIT me, et ego exáudiam eum: erípiam eum, et glorificábo eum: longitúdine diérum adimplébo eum. Ps. 90. 1. Qui hábitat in adjutório Altíssimi: in protectióne Dei cæli commorábitur. V. Glória Patri.
[He shall cry to me, and I will hear him: I will deliver him, and I will glorify him: I will fill him with length of days. Ps. He that dwelleth in the aid of the Most High shall abide under the protection of the God of Heaven. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
COLLECT
DEUS, qui Ecclésiam tuam ánnua quadragesimáli observatióne puríficas: præsta famíliæ tuæ: ut, quod a te obtinére abstinéndo nítitur, hoc bonis opéribus exsequátur. Per Dóminum.
[O God, who dost purify Thy Church by the yearly observance of Lent; grant to Thy household, that what we strive to obtain from Thee by self denial, we may secure by good works. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - 2 Corinthians 6. 1-10
FRATRES: Exhortámur vos, ne in vácuum grátiam Dei recipiátis. Ait enim: Témpore accépto exaudívi te, et in die salútis adjúvi te. Ecce nunc tempus acceptabile, ecce nunc dies salútis. Némini dantes ullam offensiónem, ut non vituperétur ministérium nostrum: sed in ómnibus exhibeámus nosmetípsos sicut Dei minístros, in multa patiéntia, in tribulatiónibus, in necessitátibus, in angústiis, in plagis, in carcéribus, in seditiónibus, in labóribus, in vigíliis, in jejúniis, in castitáte, in sciéntia, in longanimitáte, in suavitáte, in Spíritu Sancto, in caritáte non ficta, in verbo veritátis, in virtúte Dei, per arma, justítiæ a dextris et a sinístris: per glóriam et ignobilitátem: per infámiam et bonam famam: ut seductóres, et veráces: sicut qui ignóti et cógniti: quasi moriéntes, et ecce vívimus: ut castigáti, et non mortificáti: quasi tristes, semper autem gaudéntes: sicut egéntes, multos autem locupletántes: tamquam nihil habéntes et ómnia possidéntes.
[Brethren: We exhort you that you receive not the grace of God in vain. For He saith: In an accepted time have I heard thee, and in the day of salvation have I helped thee. Behold, now is the acceptable time, behold now is the day of salvation. Giving no offence to any man, that our ministry be not blamed: but in all things let us exhibit ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in tribulation, in necessities, in distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in seditions, in labors, in watchings, in fastings, in chastity, in knowledge, in long-suffering, in sweetness, in the Holy Ghost, in charity unfeigned, in the word of truth, in the power of God: by the armor of justice on the right hand and on the left: by honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report: as deceivers and yet true, as unknown and yet known: as dying, and behold we live: as chastised and not killed: as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as needy, yet enriching many: as having nothing and possessing all things.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 90. 11-12
ANGELIS suis Deus mandávit de te, ut custódiant te in ómnibus viis tuis. V. In mánibus portábunt te, ne umquam offéndas ad lápidem pedem tuum.
[God hath given His angels charge over Thee, to keep Thee in all Thy ways. V. In their hands they shall bear Thee up, lest Thou dash Thy foot against a stone.]
TRACT - Psalm 90. 1-7, 11-16
QUI hábitat in adjutório Altíssimi, in protectióne Dei cæli commorábitur. V. Dicet Dómino: Suscéptor meus es tu et refúgium meum: Deus meus, sperábo in eum. V. Quóniam ipse liberávit me de láqueo venántium, et a verbo áspero. V. Scápulis suis obumbrábit tibi, et sub pennis ejus sperábis. V. Scuto circúmdabit te véritas ejus: non timébis a timóre noctúrno. V. A sagítta volánte per diem, a negótio perambulánte in ténebris, a ruína et dæmónio meridiáno. V. Cadent a látere tuo mille, et decem míllia a dextris tuis: tibi autem non appropinquábit. V. Quóniam Angelis suis mandávit de te, ut custódiant te in ómnibus viis tuis. V. In mánibus portábunt te, ne unquam offéndas ad lápidem pedem tuum. V. Super áspidem et basilíscum ambulábis, et conculcábis leónem, et dracónem. V. Quóniam in me sperávit, liberábo eum: prótegam eum, quóniam cognóvit nomen meum. V. Invocábit me, et ego exáudiam eum: cum ipso sum in tribulatióne. V. Erípiam eum, et glorificábo eum: longitúdine diérum adimplébo eum, et osténdam illi salutáre meum.
[He that dwelleth in the aid of the Most High, shall abide under the protection of the God of heaven. V. He shall say to the Lord: Thou art my protector and my refuge: my God, in Him will I trust. V. For He hath delivered me from the snare of the hunters, and from the sharp word. V. He will overshadow thee with His shoulders, and under His wings thou shalt trust. V. His truth shall compass thee with a shield: thou shalt not be afraid of the terror of the night. V. Of the arrow that flieth in the day, of the business that walketh about in the dark, of invasion or of the noonday devil. V. A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand: but it shall not come nigh thee. V. For He hath given His angels charge over Thee, to keep Thee in all Thy ways. V. In their hands they shall bear Thee up, lest Thou dash Thy foot against a stone. V. Thou shalt walk upon the asp and the basilisk, and Thou shalt trample under foot the lion and the dragon. V. Because he hoped in Me I will deliver him: I will protect him, because he hath known My name. V. He shall cry to Me, and I will hear him: I am with him in tribulation. V. I will deliver him, and I will glorify him: I will fill him with length of days, and I will show him My salvation.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 4. 1-11
IN illo témpore: Ductus est Jesus in desértum a Spíritu, ut tentarétur a diábolo. Et cum jejunásset quadragínta diébus et quadragínta nóctibus, póstea esúriit. Et accédens tentátor, dixit ei: Si Fílius Dei es, dic ut lápides isti panes fiant. Qui respóndens dixit: Scriptum est: Non in solo pane vivit homo, sed in omni verbo, quod procédit de ore Dei. Tunc assúmpsit eum diábolus in sanctam civitátem, et státuit eum super pinnáculum templi, et dixit ei: Si Fílius Dei es, mitte te deórsum. Scriptum est enim: Quia Angelis suis mandávit de te, et in mánibus tollent te, ne forte offéndas ad lápidem pedem tuum. Ait illi Jesus: Rursum scriptum est: Non tentábis Dóminum Deum tuum. Iterum assúmpsit eum diábolus in montem excélsum valde: et osténdit ei ómnia regna mundi, et glóriam eórum, et dixit ei: Hæc ómnia tibi dabo, si cadens adoráveris me. Tunc dicit ei Jesus: Vade, Sátana: scriptum est enim: Dóminum Deum tuum adorábis, et illi soli sérvies. Tunc relíquit eum diábolus: et ecce Angeli accessérunt et ministrábant ei.
[At that time Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert, to be tempted by the devil. And when He had fasted forty days and forty nights, afterwards He was hungry. And the tempter coming said to Him: If Thou be the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread. Who answered and said: It is written: Not in bread alone doth man live, but in every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God. Then the devil took Him up into the holy city and set Him upon the pinnacle of the temple, and said to Him: If Thou be the Son of God, cast Thyself down. For it is written: That He hath given His angels charge over Thee, and in their hands shall they bear Thee up, lest perhaps Thou dash Thy foot against a stone. Jesus said to him: It is written again: Thou shalt not tempt the Lord Thy God. Again the devil took Him up into a very high mountain and showed Him all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, and said to Him: All these will I give Thee, if falling down Thou wilt adore me. Then Jesus saith to him: Begone, Satan! for it is written: The Lord thy God shalt thou adore, and Him only shalt thou serve. Then the devil left Him: and behold angels came, and ministered to Him.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 90. 4-5
SCÁPULIS suis obumbrábit tibi Dóminus, et sub pennis ejus sperábis: scuto circúmdabit te véritas ejus.
[The Lord will overshadow thee with His shoulders, and under His wings thou shalt trust: His truth shall compass thee with a shield.]
SECRET
SACRIFÍCIUM quadragesimális inítii solémniter immolámus, te, Dómine, deprecántes: ut, cum epulárum restrictióne carnálium, a nóxiis quoque voluptátibus temperémus. Per Dóminum.
[We solemnly offer Thee, O Lord, the sacrifice of the beginning of Lent, beseeching Thee, that by refraining from flesh at our meals, we may learn also to avoid sinful pleasures. Through our Lord.]
Preface for Lent
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 90. 4-5
SCÁPULIS suis obumbrábit tibi Dóminus, et sub pennis ejus sperábis: scuto circúmdabit te véritas ejus.
[The Lord will overshadow thee with His shoulders, and under His wings thou shalt trust: His truth shall compass thee with a shield.]
POSTCOMMUNION
TUI nos, Dómine, sacraménti libátio sancta restáuret: et a vetustáte purgátos, in mystérii salutáris fáciat transíre consórtium. Per Dóminum.
[May the holy partaking of Thy sacrament, restore us, O Lord, and cleansing us from our old life, make us to pass into the fellowship of the mystery of salvation. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Second Sunday of Lent
INTROIT - Psalm 24. 6, 3, 22
REMINISCERE miseratiónum tuárum, Dómine, et misericórdiæ tuæ, quæ a sæculo sunt: ne umquam dominéntur nobis inimíci nostri: líbera nos, Deus Israël, ex omnibus angús tiis nostris. Ps. 24. 12. Ad te, Dómine, levávi ánimam meam: Deus meus, in te confído, non erubéscam. V. Glória Patri.
[Remember, O Lord, Thy bowels of compassion, and Thy mercies that are from the beginning of the world, lest at any time our enemies rule over us: deliver us, O God of Israel, from all our tribulations. Ps. To Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul: in Thee, O my God, I put my trust; let me not be ashamed V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
COLLECT
DEUS, qui cónspicis omni nos virtúte destítui: intérius exteriúsque custódi; ut ab ómnibus adversitátibus muniámur in córpore, et a pravis cogitatiónibus mundémur in mente. Per Dóminum.
[O God, who seest that we have no power whatever from ourselves; keep us both outwardly in our bodies and inwardly in our souls; that we may be defended from all adversities which may happen to the body and from all evil thoughts which may hurt the soul. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - 1 Thessalonians 4. 1-7
FRATRES: Rogámus vos, et obsecrámus in Dómino Jesu: ut, quemádmodum accepístis a nobis, quómodo opórteat vos ambuláre et placére Deo, sic et ambulétis, ut abundétis magis. Scitis enim quæ præcépta déderim vobis per Dóminum Jesum. Hæc est enim volántas Dei, sanctificátio vestra: ut abstineátis vos a fornicatióne, ut sciat unusquísque vestrum vas suum possidére in sanctificatióne et honóre; non in passióne desidérii, sicut et gentes, quæ ignórant Deum: et ne quis supergrediátur, neque circumvéniat in negótio fratrem suum: quóniam vindex est Dóminus de his ómnibus, sicut prædíximus vobis et testificáti sumus. Non enim vocávit nos Deus in immundítiam, sed in sanctificatiónem: in Christo Jesu Dómino nostro.
[Brethren: We pray and beseech you in the Lord Jesus that, as you have received from us, now you ought to walk and to please God, so also you would walk, that you may abound the more. For you know what precepts I have given to you by the Lord Jesus. For this is the will of God, your sanctification: that you should abstain from fornication, that every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor; not in the passion of lust, like the Gentiles that know not God: and that no man overreach nor circumvent his brother in business: because the Lord is the avenger of all these things, as we have told you before and have testified. For God hath not called us unto uncleanness, but unto sanctification: in Christ Jesus our Lord.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 24. 17-18
TRIBULATIÓNES cordis mei dilatátæ sunt: de necessitátibus meis éripe me, Dómine. V. Vide humilitátem meam, et labórem meum: et dimítte ómnia peccáta mea.
[The troubles of my heart are multiplied: deliver me from my necessities, O Lord. V. See my abjection and my labor, and forgive me all my sins.]
TRACT - Psalm 105. 1-4
CONFITÉMINI Dómino, quóniam bonus: quóniam in sæculum misericórdia ejus. V. Quis loquétur poténtias Dómini: audítas fáciet omnes laudes ejus? V. Beáti qui custódiunt judícium et fáciunt justítiam in omni témpore. V. Memento nostri, Dómine, in beneplácito pópuli tui: vísita nos in salutári tuo.
[Give glory to the Lord, for He is good: for His mercy endureth for ever. V. Who shall declare the powers of the Lord: who. shall set forth all His praises? V. Blessed are they that keep judgment and do justice at all times. V. Remember us, O Lord, in the favor of Thy people: visit us with Thy salvation.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 17. 1-9
IN illo témpore: Assúmpsit Jesus Petrum, et Jacóbum, et Joánnem fratrem ejus, et duxit illos in montem excélsum seórsum: et transfigurátus est ante eos. Et resplénduit fácies ejus sicut sol: vestiménta autem ejus facta sunt alba sicut nix. Et ecce apparuérunt illis Móyses et Elías cum eo loquéntes. Respóndens autem Petrus, dixit ad Jesum: Dómine, bonum est nos hic esse: si vis, faciámus hic tria tabernácula, tibi unum, Móysi unum, et Elíæ unum. Adhuc eo loquénte, ecce nubes lúcida obumbrávit eos. Et ecce vox de nube, dicens: Hic est Fílius meus diléctus, in quo mihi bene complácui: ipsum audíte. Et audiéntes discípuli, cecidérunt in fáciem suam, et timuérunt valde. Et accéssit Jesus, et tétigit eos, dixítque eis: Súrgite, et nolíte timére. Levántes autem óculos suos, néminem vidérunt nisi solum Jesum. Et descendéntibus illis de monte, præcépit eis Jesus, dicens: Némini dixéritis visiónem, donec Fílius hóminis a mórtuis resúrgat.
[At that time Jesus took Peter and James, and John his brother, and bringeth them up into a high mountain apart: and He was transfigured before them. And his face did shine as the sun: and His garments became white as snow. And behold there appeared to them Moses and Elias talking with Him. And Peter answering, said to Jesus: Lord, it is good for us to be here: if Thou wilt, let us make here three tabernacles, one for Thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. And as he was yet speaking, behold a bright cloud overshadowed them. And lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying: This is My beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear ye Him. And the disciples hearing, fell upon their face and were very much afraid. And Jesus came and touched them, and said to them: Arise, and fear not. And they lifting up their eyes saw no one, but only Jesus. And as they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying: Tell the vision to no man till the Son of Man be risen from the dead.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 118. 47-48
MEDITÁBOR in mandátis tuis, quæ diléxi valde: et levábo manus meas ad mandata tua, quæ diléxi.
[I will meditate on Thy commandments, which I have loved exceedingly: and I will lift up my hands to Thy commandments, which I have loved.]
SECRET
SACRIFÍCIIS præséntibus, Dómine, quæsumus, inténde placátus: ut et devotióni nostræ profíciant et salúti. Per Dóminum.
[Peacefully look down, we beseech Thee, O Lord, upon these sacrifices, that they may both increase our devotion and contribute to our salvation. Through our Lord.]
Preface for Lent
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 5. 2-4
INTÉLLIGE clamórem meum: inténde voci oratiónis meæ, Rex meus, et Deus meus: quóniam ad te orábo, Dómine.
[Understand my cry: hearken to the voice of my prayer, O my King and my God: for to Thee will I pray, O Lord.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SÚPPLICES te rogámus, omnipotens Deus: ut, quos tuis réficis sacraméntis, tibi étiam plácitis móribus dignánter deservíre concédas. Per Dóminum.
[We humbly beseech Thee, almighty God, that we whom Thou hast strengthened with Thy sacraments, may henceforth serve and please Thee in worthiness of life. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Third Sunday of Lent
INTROIT - Psalm 24. 15-16
OCULI mei semper ad Dóminum, quia ipse evéllet de láqueo pedes meos: réspice in me, et miserére mei, quóniam únicus et pauper sum ego. Ps. 24. 12. Ad te, Dómine, levávi ánimam meam: Deus meus, in te confído, non erubéscam. V. Glória Patri.
[My eyes are ever towards the Lord: for He shall pluck my feet out of the snare: look Thou upon me, and have mercy on me; for I am alone and poor. Ps. To Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul: in Thee, O my God, I put my trust, let me not be ashamed. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
COLLECT
QUÆSUMUS, omnípotens Deus, vota humílium réspice atque ad defensiónem nostram, déxteram tuæ majestátis exténde. Per Dóminum.
[We beseech Thee, almighty God, regard the desires of Thy humble servants, and stretch forth the right hand of Thy majesty to be our defence. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Ephesians 5. 1-9
FRATRES: Estóte imitatóres Dei, sicut fílii caríssimi: et ambuláte in dilectióne, sicut et Christus diléxit nos, et trádidit semetípsum pro nobis oblatiónem, et hóstiam Deo in odórem suavitátis. Fornicátio autem et om nis immundítia, aut avarítia nec nominétur in vobis, sicut decet sanctos: aut turpitúdo aut stultilóquium aut scurrílitas, quæ ad rem non pértinet: sed magis gratiárum áctio. Hoc enim scitóte intelligéntes, quod omnis fornicátor, aut immúndus, aut avárus, quod est idolórum sérvitus, non habet hereditátem in regno Christi, et Dei. Nemo vos sedúcat inánibus verbis: propter hæc enim venit ira Dei in fílios diffidéntiæ. Nolíte ergo éffici partícipes eórum. Erátis enim aliquándo ténebræ: nunc autem lux in Dómino. Ut fílii lucis ambuláte: fructus enim lucis est in omni bonitáte et justítia et veritáte.
[Brethren: Be ye followers of God, as most dear children: and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us and hath delivered Himself for us, an oblation and a sacrifice to God for an odor of sweetness. But fornication, and all uncleanness or covetousness, let it not so much as be named among you, as becometh saints: or obscenity, or foolish talking, or scurrility, which is to no purpose: but rather giving of thanks. For know you this, and understand, that no fornicator, or unclean or covetous person, which is a serving of idols, hath inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words: for because of these things cometh the anger of God upon the children of unbelief. Be ye not therefore partakers with them. For you were heretofore darkness: but now light in the Lord. Walk then as children of the light: for the fruit of the light is in all goodness, and justice, and truth.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 9. 20, 4
EXSÚRGE, Dómine, non præváleat homo: judicéntur gentes in conspéctu tuo. V. In converténdo inimícum meum retrórsum, infirmabúntur, et períbunt a fácie tua.
[Arise, O Lord, let no man be strengthened; let the nations be judged in Thy sight. V. When my enemy shall be turned back, they shall be weakened and perish before Thy face.]
TRACT - Psalm 122. 1-3
AD te levávi óculos meos, qui hábitas in cælis. V. Ecce sicut óculi servórum in mánibus dominórum suórum. V. Et sicut óculi ancíllæ in mánibus dóminæ suæ: ita óculi nostri ad Dóminum Deum nostrum, do nec misereátur nostri. V. Miserére nobis, Dómine, miserére nobis.
[To Thee have I lifted up my eyes, who dwellest in heaven. V. Behold as the eyes of servants are on the hands of their masters. V. And as the eyes of the handmaid are on the hands of her mistress: so are our eyes unto the Lord our God, until He have mercy on us. V. Have mercy on us, O Lord, have mercy on us.]
GOSPEL - Luke 11. 14-28
IN illo témpore: Erat Jesus ejíciens dæmónium, et illud erat mutum. Et cum ejecísset dæmónium, locútus est mutus, et admirátæ sunt turbæ. Quidam autem ex eis dixérunt: In Beélzebub príncipe dæmoniórum éjicit dæmónia. Et álii tentántes, signum de cælo quærébant ab eo. Ipse autem ut vidit cogitatiónes eórum, dixit eis: Omne regnum in seípsum divísum desolábitur, et domus supra domum cadet. Si autem et sátanas in seípsum divísus est, quómodo stabit regnum ejus? quia dícitis in Beélzebub me ejícere dæmónia. Si autem ego in Beélzebub ejício dæmónia, fílii vestri in quo ejíciunt? Ideo ipsi júdices vestri erunt. Porro si in dígito Dei ejício dæmónia: profécto pervénit in vos regnum Dei. Cum fortis armátus custódit átrium suum, in pace sunt ea, quæ póssidet. Si autem fórtior eo supervéniens vícerit eum, univérsa arma ejus áuferet, in quibus confidébat, et spólia ejus distríbuet. Qui non est mecum, contra me est: et qui non cólligit mecum, dispérgit. Cum immúndus spíritus exíerit de hómine, ámbulat per loca inaquósa, quærens réquiem: et non invéniens, dicit: Revértar in domum meam, unde exívi. Et cum vénerit, ínvenit eam scopis mundátam, et ornátam. Tunc vadit, et assúmit septem álios spíritus secum nequióres se, et ingréssi hábitant ibi. Et fiunt novíssima hóminis illíus pejóra prióribus. Factum est autem, cum hæc díceret: extóllens vocem quædam múlier de turba, dixit illi: Beátus venter, quæ te portávit, et úbera, quæ suxísti. At ille dixit: Quinímo beáti quæ áudiunt verbum Dei, et custódiunt illud.
[At that time Jesus was casting out a devil, and the same was dumb. And when He had cast out the devil, the dumb spoke, and the multitudes were in admiration at it. But some of them said: He casteth out devils by Beelzebub, the prince of devils. And others, tempting, asked of Him a sign from heaven. But He, seeing their thoughts, said to them: Every kingdom divided against itself shall be brought to desolation, and house upon house shall fall. And if Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom stand? because you say that through Beelzebub I cast out devils. Now if I cast out devils by Beelzebub, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore, they shall be your judges. But if I by the finger of God cast out devils: doubtless the kingdom of God is come upon you. When a strong man armed keepeth his court, those things are in peace which he possesseth. But if a stronger than he come upon him and overcome him, he will take away all his armor wherein he trusted, and will distribute his spoils. He that is not with Me is against Me: and he that gathereth not with Me scattereth. When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through places without water, seeking rest: and not finding, he saith: I will return into my house whence I came out. And when he is come, he findeth it swept and garnished. Then he goeth and taketh with him seven other spirits more wicked than himself, and entering in they dwell there. And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first. And it came to pass, as He spoke these things, a certain woman from the crowd, lifting up her voice, said to Him: Blessed is the womb that bore Thee, and the paps that gave Thee suck. But He said: Yea, rather, blessed are they who hear the word of God, and keep it.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 18. 9, 10, 11, 12
JUSTÍTIÆ Dómini rectæ, lætificántes corda, et judícia ejus dulcióra super mel et favum: nam et servus tuus custódit ea.
[The justices of the Lord are right, rejoicing hearts, and His judgments are sweeter than honey and the honeycomb: for Thy servant keepeth them.]
SECRET
HÆC hóstia, Dómine, quæsumus, emúndet nostra delícta: et ad sacrifícium celebrándum, subditórum tibi córpora mentésque sanctíficet. Per Dóminum.
[May this offering, we beseech Thee, O Lord, cleanse away our sins, sanctifying Thy servants in both soul and body for the celebration of this sacrifice. Through our Lord.]
Preface for Lent
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 83. 4-5
PASSER invénit sibi domum, et turtur nidum, ubi repónat pullos suos: altária tua, Dómine virtútum, Rex meus, et Deus meus: beáti qui hábitant in domo tua, in sæculum sæculi laudábunt te.
[The sparrow hath found herself a house, and the turtle a nest, where she may lay her young ones: Thy altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King, and my God: blessed are they that dwell in Thy house, they shall praise Thee for ever and ever.]
POSTCOMMUNION
A CUNCTIS nos, quæsumus, Dómine, reátibus et perículis propitiátus absólve: quos tanti mystérii tríbuis esse partícipes. Per Dóminum.
[Mercifully absolve us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, from all guilt and deliver us from all danger, whom Thou dost grant to partake of so great a mystery. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Fourth Sunday of Lent
INTROIT - Isaias 66. 10-11
LÆTARE, Jerúsalem: et convéntum fácite, omnes qui dilígitis eam: gaudéte cum lætítia, qui in tristítia fuístis: ut exsultétis, et satiémini ab ubéribus consolatiónis vestræ. Ps. 121. 2. Lætátus sum in his, quæ dicta sunt mihi: in domum Dómini íbimus. V. Glória Patri.
[Rejoice, O Jerusalem: and come together all you that love her: rejoice with joy, you that have been in sorrow: that you may exult, and be filled from the breasts of your consolation. Ps. I rejoiced at the things that were said to me: we shall go into the house of the Lord. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
COLLECT
CONCÉDE, quæsumus, omnípotens Deus: ut qui ex mérito nostræ actiónis afflígimur, tuæ grátiæ consolatióne respirémus. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, we beseech Thee, almighty God, that we, who for our evil deeds justly deserve to be punished, by the comfort of Thy grace may mercifully be relieved. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Galatians 4. 22-31
FRATRES: Scriptum est: Quóniam Abraham duos fílios hábuit: unum de ancílla, et unum de líbera. Sed qui de ancílla, secúndum carnem natus est: qui autem de líbera, per repromissiónem: quæ sunt per allegoríam dicta. Hæc enim sunt duo testaménta. Unum quidem in monte Sina, in servitútem génerans: quæ est Agar: Sina enim mons est in Arábia, qui conjúnctus est ei, quæ nunc est Jerúsalem, et servit cum fíliis suis. Illa autem, quæ sursum est Jerúsalem, líbera est, quæ est mater nostra. Scriptum est enim: Lætáre, stérilis, quæ non paris: erúmpe et clama, quæ non párturis: quia multi fílii desértæ, magis quam ejus, quæ habet virum. Nos autem, fratres, secúndum Isaac promissiónis fílii sumus. Sed quómodo tunc is, qui secúndum carnem natus fúerat, persequebátur eum, qui secúndum spíritum: ita et nunc. Sed quid dicit Scriptúra? Ejice ancíllam et fílium ejus: non enim heres erit fílius ancíllæ cum fílio líberæ. Itaque, fratres, non sumus ancíllæ fílii, sed líberæ: qua libertáte Christus nos liberávit.
[Brethren: It is written that Abraham had two sons: the one by a bondwoman and the other by a free woman. But he who was of the bondwoman was born according to the flesh: but he of the free woman was by promise: which things are said by an allegory. For these are the two testaments. The one from Mount Sinai, engendering unto bondage: which is Agar: for Sinai is a mountain in Arabia, which hath affinity to that Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children. But that Jerusalem which is above is free, which is our mother. For it is written: Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not: break forth and cry, thou that travailest not: for many are the children of the desolate, more than of her that hath a husband. Now we, brethren, as Isaac was, are the children of promise. But as then he that was born according to the flesh persecuted him that was after the spirit: so also it is now. But what saith the scripture? Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall not be heir with the son of the free woman. So then, brethren, we are not the children of the bondwoman, but of the free: by the freedom wherewith Christ has made us free.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 121. 1-7
LÆTÁTUS sum in his, quæ dicta sunt mihi: in domum Dómini íbimus. V. Fiat pax in virtúte tua: et abundántia in túrribus tuis.
[I rejoiced at the things that were said to me: we shall go into the house of the Lord. V. Let peace be in Thy strength: and abundance in Thy towers.]
TRACT - Psalm 124. 1-2
QUI confídunt in Dómino, sicut mons Sion: non commovébitur in ætérnum, qui hábitat in Jerúsalem. V. Montes in circúitu ejus: et Dóminus in circúitu pópuli sui, ex hoc nunc et usque in sæculum.
[They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion: he shall not be moved for ever that dwelleth in Jerusalem. V. Mountains are round about it: so the Lord is round about His people, from henceforth now and for ever.]
GOSPEL - John 6. 1-15
IN illo témpore: Abiit Jesus trans mare Galilææ, quod est Tiberíadis: et sequebátur eum multitúdo magna, quia vidébant signa, quæ faciébat super his, qui infirmabántur. Súbiit ergo in montem Jesus: et ibi sedébat cum discípulis suis. Erat autem próximum Pascha, dies festus Judæórum. Cum sublevásset ergo óculos Jesus, et vidísset quia multitúdo máxima venit ad eum, dixit ad Philíppum: Unde emémus panes, ut mandúcent hi? Hoc autem dicébat tentans eum: ipse enim sciébat quid esset factúrus. Respóndit ei Philíppus: Ducentórum denariórum panes non suffíciunt eis, ut unusquís que módicum quid accípiat. Dicit ei unus ex discípulis ejus, Andréas frater Simónis Petri: Est puer unus hic, qui habet quinque panes hordeáceos et duos pisces: sed hæc quid sunt inter tantos? Dixit ergo Jesus: Fácite hómines discúmbere. Erat autem fœnum multum in loco. Discubuérunt ergo viri, número quasi quinque míllia. Accépit ergo Jesus panes, et cum grátias egísset, distríbuit discumbéntibus: simíliter et ex píscibus quantum volébant. Ut autem impléti sunt, dixit discípulis suis: Collígite quæ superavérunt fragménta, ne péreant. Collegérunt ergo, et implevérunt duódecim cóphinos fragmentórum ex quinque pánibus hordeáceis, quæ superfuérunt his qui manducáverant. Illi ergo hómines cum vidíssent quod Jesus fécerat signum, dicébant: Quia hic est vere Prophéta, qui ventúrus est in mundum. Jesus ergo cum cognovísset quia ventúri essent ut ráperent eum, et fácerent eum regem, fugit íterum in montem ipse solus.
[At that time Jesus went over the sea of Galilee, which is that of Tiberias: and a great multitude followed Him, because they saw the miracles which He did on them that were diseased. Jesus therefore went up into a mountain: and there He sat with His disciples. Now the Pasch, the festival day of the Jews, was near at hand. When Jesus therefore had lifted up His eyes, and seen that a very great multitude cometh to Him, He said to Philip: Whence shall we buy bread that these may eat? And this He said to try him: for He Himself knew what He would do. Philip answered Him: Two hundred pennyworth of bread is not sufficient for them, that every one may take a little. One of His disciples, Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, saith to Him: There is a boy here that hath five barley loaves and two fishes: but what are these among so many? Then Jesus said: Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. The men therefore sat down, in number about five thousand. And Jesus took the loaves, and when He had given thanks, He distributed to them that were set down: in like manner also of the fishes, as much as they would. And when they were filled, He said to His disciples: Gather up the fragments that remain, lest they be lost. They gathered up therefore, and filled twelve baskets with the fragments of the five barley loaves which remained over and above to them that had eaten. Now those men, when they had seen what a miracle Jesus had done, said: This is of a truth the prophet that is to come into the world. Jesus therefore when He knew that they would come to take Him by force and make Him king, fled again into the mountain, Himself alone.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 134. 3, 6
LAUDÁTE Dóminum, quia benígnus est: psállite nómini ejus, quóniam suávis est: ómnia quæcúmque vóluit, fecit in cælo, et in terra.
[Praise ye the Lord, for He is good: sing ye to His name, for He is sweet: whatsoever He pleased, He hath done in heaven and in earth.]
SECRET
SACRIFÍCIIS præséntibus, Dómine, quæsumus, inténde placátus: ut et devotióni nostræ profíciant, et salúti. Per Dóminum.
[Look down mercifully upon These sacrifices, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that they may increase our devotion and effect our salvation. Through our Lord.]
Preface for Lent
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 121. 3-4
JERÚSALEM, quæ ædificátur ut cívitas, cujus participátio ejus in idípsum: illuc enim ascendérunt tribus, tribus Dómini, ad confiténdum nómini tuo, Dómine.
[Jerusalem, which is built as a city, which is compact together: for thither did the tribes go up, the tribes of the Lord, to praise Thy Name, O Lord.]
POSTCOMMUNION
DA nobis, quæsumus, miséricors Deus: ut sancta tua, quibus inces sánter explémur, sincéris tractémus obséquiis, et fidéli semper mente sumámus. Per Dóminum.
[Grant us, we beseech Thee, O merciful God, ever to celebrate with sincere worship and receive with faithful hearts Thy holy mysteries, of which we continually partake. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Fifth Sunday of Lent - Passion Sunday
INTROIT - Psalm 42. 1-2
JUDICA me, Deus, et discérne causam meam de gente non sancta: ab hómine iníquo, et dolóso éripe me: quia tu es Deus meus, et fortitúdo mea. Ps. 42.3. Emítte lucem tuam, et veritátem tuam: ipsa, me deduxérunt, et adduxérunt in montem sanctum tuum, et in tabernácula tua.
[Judge me, O God, and distinguish my cause against an ungodly nation: O deliver me from the unjust and deceitful man: for Thou art my God and my strength. Ps. Send out Thy light and Thy truth: they have led me and brought me unto Thy holy hill, even unto Thy tabernacles. Judge me.]
Kyrie
COLLECT
QUÆSUMUS, omnípotens Deus, famíliam tuam propítius réspice: ut, te largiénte, regátur in córpore; et, te servánte, custodiátur in mente. Per Dóminum.
[We beseech Thee, almighty God, mercifully look upon Thy family: that by Thy great goodness it may be governed in body, and by Thy protection be preserved in mind. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Hebrews 9. 11-15
FRATRES: Christus assistens póntifex futurórum bonórum, per ámplius et perféctius tabernáculum non manufáctum, id est, non hujus creatiónis: neque per sánguinem hircórum aut vitulórum, sed per próprium sánguinem introívit semel in Sancta, ætérna redemptióne invénta. Si enim sanguis hircórum et taurórum, et cinis vítulæ aspérsus, inquinátos sanctíficat ad emundatiónem carnis; quanto magis Sanguis Christi, qui per Spíritum Sanctum semetípsum óbtulit imma culátum Deo, emundábit consciéntiam nostram ab opéribus mórtuis, ad serviéndum Deo viventi? Et ídeo novi testaménti mediátor est: ut morte intercedénte, in redemptiónem eárum prævaricatiónum, quæ erant sub prióri testaménto, repromissiónem accípiant, qui vocáti sunt ætérnæ hereditátis, in Christo Jesu Dómino nostro.
[Brethren: Christ being come, a High Priest of the good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is, not of this creation: neither by the blood of goats or of calves, but by His own blood, entered once into the Holies, having obtained eternal redemption. For if the blood of goats and of oxen and the ashes of an heifer, being sprinkled, sanctify such as are defiled, to the cleansing of the flesh: how much more shall the blood of Christ, who, by the Holy Ghost, offered Himself unspotted unto God, cleanse our conscience from dead works, to serve the living God? And therefore He is the Mediator of the new testament: that by means of His death, for the redemption of those transgressions which were under the former testament, they that are called may receive the promise of eternal inheritance, in Christ Jesus our Lord.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 142. 9. 10; 17. 48-49
ERIPE me, Dómine, de inimícis me is: doce me fácere voluntátem tuam. V. Liberátor meus, Dómine, de géntibus iracúndis: ab insurgéntibus in me exaltábis me a viro iníquo erípies me.
[Deliver me, O Lord, from my enemies: teach me to do Thy will. V. My deliverer, O Lord, from the angry nations: Thou wilt lift me up above them that rise up against me: from the unjust man Thou wilt deliver me.]
TRACT - Psalm 128. 1-4
SÆPE expugnavérunt me a juventúte mea. V. Dicat nunc Israël: sæpe expugnavérunt me a juventúte mea. V. Etenim non potuérunt mihi: supra dorsum meum fabricavérunt peccatóres. V. Prolongavérunt iniquitátes suas: Dóminus justus concídit cervíces peccatórum.
[Often have they fought against me from my youth. V. Let Israel now say: often have they fought against me from my youth. V. But they could not prevail over me: the wicked have wrought upon my back. V. They have lengthened their iniquities: the Lord who is just will cut the necks of sinners.]
GOSPEL - John 8. 46-59
IN illo témpore: Dicébat Jesus turbis Judæórum: Quis ex vobis árguet me de peccáto? Si veritátem dico vobis, quare non créditis mihi? Qui ex Deo est, verba Dei audit. Proptérea vos non audítis, quia ex Deo non estis. Respondérunt ergo Judæi, et dixé runt ei: Nonne bene dícimus nos, quia Samaritánus es tu, et dæmónium, habes? Respóndit Jesus: Ego dæmónium non hábeo: sed honorífico Patrem meum, et vos in honorástis me. Ego autem non quæro glóriam meam: est qui quærat, et júdicet. Amen, amen dico vobis: si quis sermónem meum serváverit, mortem non vidébit in ætérnum. Dixérunt ergo Judæi: Nunc cognóvimus quia dæmónium habes. Abraham mórtuus est, et prophétæ: et tu dicis: Si quis sermónem meum serváverit, non gustábit mortem in ætérnum. Numquid tu major es patre nostro Abraham, qui mórtuus est? Et prophétæ mórtui sunt. Quem teípsum facis? Respóndit Jesus: Si ego glorífico meípsum, glória mea nihil est: est Pater meus, qui gloríficat me, quem vos dícitis quia Deus vester est, et non cognovístis eum: ego autem novi eum: et si vobis, mendax. Sed scio eum, et sermónem ejus servo. Abraham pater vester exsultávit ut vidéret diem meum: vidit, et gavísus est. Dixérunt ergo Judæi ad eum: Quinquagínta annos nondum habes, et Abraham vidísti? Dixit eis Jesus: Amen, amen dico vobis, ántequam Abraham fíeret, ego sum. Tulérunt ergo lápides, ut jácerent in eum: Jesus autem abscóndit se, et exívit de templo.
[At that time Jesus said to the multitudes of the Jews: Which of you shall convince Me of sin? If I say the truth to you, why do you not believe Me? He that is of God heareth the words of God. Therefore you hear them not, because you are not of God. The Jews therefore answered, and said to Him: Do not we say well, that Thou art a Samaritan, and hast a devil? Jesus answered: I have not a devil: but I honor My Father, and you have dishonored Me. But I seek not My own glory: there is One that seeketh and judgeth. Amen, amen, I say to you: If any man keep My word, he shall not see death for ever. The Jews therefore said: Now we know that Thou hast a devil. Abraham is dead, and the prophets: and Thou sayest: If any man keep My word, he shall not taste death for ever. Art Thou greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? and the prophets are dead, whom dost Thou make Thyself? Jesus answered: If I glorify Myself, My glory is nothing: it is My Father that glorifieth Me, of whom you say that He is your God, and you have not known Him: but I know Him: And if I shall say that I know Him not, I shall be like to you, a liar. But I do know Him, and do keep His word. Abraham your father rejoiced that he might see My day: he saw it and was glad. The Jews therefore said to Him: Thou art not yet fifty years old: and hast Thou seen Abraham? Jesus said to them: Amen, amen, I say to you, before Abraham was made, I am. They took up stones therefore to cast at Him: but Jesus hid Himself, and went out of the temple.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 118. 17, 107
CONFITÉBOR tibi, Dómine, in toto corde meo: retríbue servo tuo: vivam, et custódiam sermónes tuos: vivífica me secúndum verbum tuum Dómine.
[I will confess to Thee, O Lord, with my whole heart: render to Thy servant: I shall live and keep Thy words: enliven me according to Thy word, O Lord.]
SECRET
HÆC múnera, quæsumus, Dómine, et víncula nostræ pravitátis absólvant, et tuæ nobis misericórdiæ dona concílient. Per Dóminum.
[May these offerings, we beseech Thee, O Lord, loosen the bonds of our wickedness, and procure for us the gifts of Thy mercy. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Holy Cross
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - 1 Corinthians. 11. 24, 25
HOC corpus, quod pro vobis tradétur: hic calix novi testaménti est in meo sánguine, dicit Dóminus: hoc fácite, quotiescúmque súmitis, in meam commemoratiónem.
[This is My Body which shall be delivered for you: this chalice is the new testament in My Blood, saith, the Lord: do this, as often as you receive it, in commemoration of Me.]
POSTCOMMUNION
ADÉSTO nobis, Dómine, Deus noster: et quos tuis mystériis recreásti, perpétuis defénde subsídiis. Per Dóminum.
[Draw near to us, O Lord, our God, and by Thy unfailing help defend those whom Thy mysteries have refreshed. Through our Lord.]