Pentecost Sunday
INTROIT - Wisdom. 1. 7
SPIRITUS Dómini replévit orbem terrárum, allelúia: et hoc quod cóntinet ómnia, sciéntiam habet vocis. Allelúia, allelúia, allelúia. Ps. 67. 2. Exsúrgat Deus, et dissipéntur inimíci ejus: et fúgiant, qui odérunt eum, a fácie ejus. V. Gloria Patri.
[The Spirit of the Lord hath filled the whole world, alleluia; and that which containeth all things hath knowledge of the voice. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered: and let them that hate Him flee from before His face. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, qui hodiérna die corda fidélium Sancti Spíritus illustratióne docuísti: da nobis in eódem Spíritu recta sápere; et de ejus semper consolatióne gaudére. Per Dóminum.
[O God, who on this day hadst taught the hearts of Thy faithful by the light of the Holy Ghost, grant us by the same Spirit to have a right judgment in all things and ever to rejoice in His consolation. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Acts 2. 1-11
CUM compleréntur dies Pentecóstes, erant omnes discípuli páriter in eódem loco: et factus est repénte de cælo sonus, tamquam adveniéntis spíritus veheméntis: et replévit totam domum ubi erant sedéntes. Et apparuérunt illis dispertítæ linguæ tamquam ignis, sedítque supra síngulos eórum: et repléti sunt omnes Spíritu Sancto, et cœpérunt loqui váriis linguis, prout Spíritus Sanctus dabat éloqui illis. Erant autem in Jerúsalem habitántes Judæi, viri religiósi ex omni natióne, quæ sub cælo est. Facta autem hac voce, convénit multitúdo, et mente confúsa est, quóniam audiébat unusquísque lingua sua illos loquéntes. Stupébant autem omnes, et mirabántur, dicéntes: Nonne ecce omnes isti, qui loqúuntur, Galilæi sunt? Et quómodo nos audívimus unusquísque linguam nostram, in qua nati sumus? Parthi et Medi, et Ælamítæ, et qui hábitant Mesopotámiam, Judæam, et Cappadóciam, Pontum, et Asíam, Phrýgiam, et Pamphýliam, Ægýptum et partes Líbyæ, quæ est circa Cyrénen, et ádvenæ Románi, Judæi quoque et Prosélyti, Cretes et Arabes: audivímus eos loquéntes nostris linguis magnália Dei.
[When the days of the Pentecost were accomplished, they were all together in one place; and suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a mighty wind coming, and it filled the whole house where they were sitting. And there appeared to them parted tongues as it were of fire, and it sat upon every one of them; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they began to speak with divers tongues, according as the Holy Ghost gave them to speak. Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. And when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together, and were confounded in mind, because that every man heard them speak in his own tongue. And they were all amazed, and wondered, saying: Behold, are not all these that speak Galileans? And how have we heard every man our own tongue wherein we were born? Parthians and Medes, and Elamites, and inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia, Egypt, and the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews also, and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians; we have heard them speak in our own tongues the wonderful works of God.]
PASCHAL ALLELUIA - Psalm 103. 30
ALLELÚIA, alleluia. V. Emítte Spíritum tuum, et creabúntur, et renovábis fáciem terræ.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Send forth Thy Spirit, and they shall be created, and Thou shalt renew the face of earth.]
All kneel here during the second Alleluia and Sequence.
ALLELÚIA. V. Veni, Sancte Spíritus, reple tuórum corda fidélium: et tui amóris in eis ignem accénde.
[Alleluia. V. Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of Thy faithful: and kindle in them the fire of Thy love.]
SEQUENCE - Veni Sancte Spiritus
1. Veni, Sancte Spiritus, et emitte cælitus lucis tuæ radium. [Come, Thou Holy Spirit, come, and from Thy celestial home shed a ray of light divine!]
2. Veni, pater pauperum, veni, dator munerum, veni, lumen cordium. [Come, Thou Father of the poor! Come, Thou Source of all our store! Come, within our bosoms shine!]
3. Consolator optime, dulcis hospes animæ, dulce refrigerium. [Thou, of comforters the best; Thou, the soul's most welcome guest; sweet refreshment here below.]
4. In labore requies, in æstu temperies, in fletu solatium. [In our labor, rest most sweet; grateful coolness in the heat; solace in the midst of woe.]
5. O lux beatissima, reple cordis intima tuorum fidelium. [O most blessèd Light divine, shine within these hearts of Thine, and our inmost being fill!]
6. Sine tuo numine, nihil est in homine, nihil est innoxium. [Where Thou art not, man hath naught, nothing good in deed or thought, nothing free from taint of ill.]
7. Lava quod est sordidum, riga quod est aridum, sana quod est saucium. [Heal our wounds, our strength renew; on our dryness pour Thy dew; wash the stains of guilt away.]
8. Flecte quod est rigidum, fove quod est frigidum, rege quod est devium. [Bend the stubborn heart and will; melt the frozen, warm the chill; guide the steps that go astray.]
9. Da tuis fidelibus, in te confidentibus, sacrum septenarium. [On the faithful, who adore and confess Thee, evermore in Thy sevenfold gift descend.]
10. Da virtutis meritum, da salutis exitum, da perenne gaudium. Amen. Alleluia.[Give them virtue's sure reward, give them Thy salvation, Lord; give them joys that never end. Amen. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - John 14. 23-31
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis: Si quis díligit me, sermónem meum servábit, et Pater meus díliget eum, et ad eum veniémus et mansiónem apud eum faciémus: qui non díligit me, sermónes meos non servat. Et sermónem quem audístis, non est meus: sed ejus, qui misit me, Patris. Hæc locútus sum vobis, apud vos manens. Paráclitus autem Spíritus Sanctus, quem mittet Pater in nómine meo, illo vos docébit ómnia et súggeret quæcúmque díxero vobis. Pacem relínquo vobis, pacem meam do vobis: non quómodo mundus dat, ego do vobis. Non turbétur cor vestrum neque formídet. Audístis quia ego dixi vobis: Vado et venio ad vos. Si diligerétis me, gauderétis útique, quia vado ad Patrem: quia Pater major me est. Et nunc dixi vobis priúsquam fiat: ut cum factum fúerit, credátis. Jam non multa loquar vobíscum. Venit enim princeps mundi hujus, et in me non habet quidquam. Sed ut cognóscat mundus, quia díligo Patrem, et sicut mandátum dedit mihi Pater, sic fácio.
[At that time Jesus said to His disciples If any one love Me, he will keep My word, and My Father will love him, and We will come to him and will make Our abode in him: he that loveth Me not keepeth not My words. And the word which you have heard is not Mine; but the Father’s who sent Me. These things have I spoken to you, abiding with you. But the Paraclete, the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring all things to your mind, whatsoever I shall have said to you. Peace I leave with you, My peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, do I give unto you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it be afraid. You have heard that I said to you: I go away, and I come unto you. If you loved Me, you would indeed be glad, because I go to the Father: for the Father is greater than I. And now I have told you before it come to pass: that when it shall come to pass you may believe. I will not now speak many things with you. For the prince of this world cometh, and in Me he hath not any thing. But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father hath given Me commandment so do I.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 67. 29-30
CONFÍRMA hoc, Deus, quod operátus es in nobis: a templo tuo, quod est in Jerúsalem, tibi ófferent reges múnera. Allelúia.
[Confirm, O God, what Thou hast wrought in us; from Thy temple, which is in Jerusalem, kings shall offer presents to Thee. Alleluia.]
SECRET
MÚNERA quæsumus, Dómine, obláta sanctífica: et corda nostra Sancti Spíritus illustratióne emúnda. Per Dóminum.
[Sanctify, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the gifts which we offer Thee, and cleanse our hearts by the light of the Holy Ghost. Through our Lord.]
Preface of Pentecost
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Acts 2. 2, 4
FACTUS est repénte de cœlo sonus, tamquam adveniéntis spíritus veheméntis, ubi erant sedéntes, allelúia: et repléti sunt omnes Spíritu Sancto, loquéntes magnália Dei. Allelúia, allelúia.
[Suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a mighty wind coming where they were sitting, alleluia; and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, speaking the wonderful works of God. Alleluia, alleluia.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SANCTI Spíritus, Dómine, corda nostra mundet infúsio: et sui roris íntima aspersióne fœcúndet. Per Dóminum.
[May the outpouring of the Holy Ghost purify our hearts, O Lord, and by the inward sprinkling of His heavenly dew may they be made fruitful. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
TIME AFTER PENTECOST
Trinity Sunday
INTROIT - Tobias 12. 6
BPENEDÍCTA sit sancta Trínitas, atque, indivisa únitas: confitébimur ei, qua fecit nobíscum misericórdiam suam. (Ps. 8. 2). Dómine Dóminus noster, quam admirábile est nomen tuum in univérsa terra! V. Glória Patri.
[Blessed be the Holy Trinity and undivided Unity: we will give glory to Him, because He hath shown His mercy to us. Ps. O Lord, our Lord, how wonderful is Thy Name in all the earth! V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
OMNÍPOTENS sempitérne Deus, qui dedísti fámulis tuis in confessióne veræ fídei, ætérnæ Trinitátis glóriam agnóscere, et in poténtia majestátis adoráre unitátem: quæsumus, ut, ejúsdem fidei firmitáte, ab ómnibus semper muniámur advérsis. Per Dóminum.
[O almighty and everlasting God, who hast granted to Thy servants, in confessing the true Faith, to acknowledge the glory of the eternal Trinity, and in the power of Majesty to adore the Unity: we beseech Thee, that by steadfastness in the same Faith, we may ever be defended against all adversity. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Romans 11. 33-36
O ALTITÚDO divitiárum sapiéntiæ et sciéntiæ Dei: quam incomprehénsibilia sunt judícia ejus, et investigábiles viæ ejus! Quis enim cognóvit sensum Dómini? Aut quis consiliárius ejus fuit? Aut quis prior dedit illi, et retribuétur ei? Quóniam ex ipso, et per ipsum, et in ipso sunt ómnia: ipsi glória in sæcula. Amen.
[O the depths of the riches of the wisdom and of the knowledge of God! How incomprehensible are His judgments, and how unsearchable His ways! For who hath known the mind of the Lord? Or who hath been His counsellor? Or who hath first given to Him, and recompense shall be made Him? For of Him, and by Him, and in Him, are all things: to Him be glory for ever. Amen.]
GRADUAL - Daniel 3. 55, 56
BENEDICTUS es, Domine, qui intueris abyssos, et sedes super Cherubim. V. Benedictus es, Domine, in firmamento cœli, et laudabilis in sæcula.
[Blessed art Thou, O Lord, that beholdest the depths and sittest above the Cherubim. V. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, in the firmament of heaven, and worthy of praise forever.]
ALLELUIA - Dan. 3. 52
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Benedictus es, Domine, Deus patrum nostrorum: et laudabilis in sæcula. Alleluia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Blessed art Thou, O Lord, the God of our fathers, and worthy to be praised forever. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 28. 18-20
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discipulis suis: Data est mihi omnis potéstas in Cœlo et in terra. Eúntes ergo docéte omnes gentes, baptizántes eos in nómine Patris, et Fílii, et Spíritus Sanctí: docéntes eos serváre ómnia quæcúmque mandávi vobis. Et ecce ego vobíscum sum ómnibus diébus, usque ad consummatiónem sæculi.
[At that time Jesus said to His disciples: All is power given to Me in heaven and on earth. Going therefore, teach ye all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And behold I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.]
OFFERTORY - Tobias 12. 6
BENEDICTUS sit Deus Pater, Unigenitus que Dei Filius, Sanctus quoque Spiritus: quia fecit nobiscum misericordiam suam.
[Blessed be God the Father, and the only-begotten Son of God, and also the Holy Ghost; because He hath shown His mercy to us.]
SECRET
SANCTÍFICA, quæsumus Dómine Deus noster, per tui Sancti nóminis invocatiónem, hujus oblatiónis hóstiam: et per eam nosmetípsos tibi pérfice munus ætérnum. Per Dóminum.
[Sanctify, we beseech Thee, O Lord, our God, by the invocation of Thy holy Name, the Sacrifice we offer, and by it make of us an everlasting offering unto Thee. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Tobias 12. 6
BENEDÍCIMUS Deum Cœli, et coram ómnibus vivéntibus confitébimur ei: quia fecit nobíscum misericórdiam suam.
[We bless the God of heaven, and before all living we will praise Him; because He has shown His mercy to us.]
POSTCOMMUNION
PROFÍCIAT nobis ad Salutem corpóris et ánimæ, Dómine Deus noster, hujus sacraménti suscéptio: et sempitérnæ sanctæ Trinitátis, ejusdémque indivíduæ unitátis conféssio. Per Dóminum.
[O Lord, our God, may our reception of this Sacrament and our acknowledgment of the holy and eternal Trinity and Its undivided Unity profit us unto health of mind and body. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
The Feast of Corpus Christi
INTROIT - Psalm 80. 17, 2
CIBAVIT eos ex ádipe fruménti, allelúia: et de petra, melle saturávit eos, allelúia, allelúia, allelúia. Ps. 80. 2. Exsultáte Deo adjutório nostro; jubiláte Deo Jacob. V. Gloria Patri.
[He fed them with the fat of corn, alleluia, and filled them with honey out of the rock, alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. Ps. Rejoice to God our helper; sing aloud to the God of Jacob. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, qui nobis sub Sacraménto mirábili passiónis tuæ memóriam reliquísti: tríbue, quæsumus, ita nos Córporis et Sánguinis tui sacra mystéria venerári; ut redemptiónis tuæ fructum in nobis júgiter sentiámus: Qui vivis.
[O God, Who in this wonderful sacrament has left us a memorial of Thy passion: grant us, we beseech Thee, so to venerate the sacred mysteries of Thy Body and Blood, that we may ever perceive within us the fruit of Thy redemption. Who livest.]
EPISTLE - 1 Corinthians 11. 23-29
FRATRES: Ego enim accépi a Dómino quod et trádidi vobis, quóniam Dóminus Jesus, in qua nocte tradebátur, accépit panem, et grátias agens, fregit, et dixit: Accípite et manducáte: hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradétur: hoc fácite in meam commemoratiónem. Simíliter et cálicem, postquam cœnávit, dicens: Hic calix novum testaméntum est in meo sánguine. Hoc fácite, quotiescúmque bibétis, in meam commemoratiónem. Quotiescúmque enim manducábitis panem hunc et cálicem bibétis, mortem Dómini annuntiábitis, donec véniat. Itaque quicúmque manducáverit panem hunc, vel bíberit cálicem Dómini indígne, reus erit córporis et sánguinis Dómini. Probet autem seípsum homo: et sic de pane illo edat et de cálice bibat. Qui enim mandúcat et bibit indígne, judícium sibi mandúcat et bibit: non dijúdicans corpus Dómini.
[Brethren, I have received of the Lord, that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, the same night in which He was betrayed, took bread, and giving thanks, broke, and said: Take ye and eat, this is My Body which shall be delivered for you; this do for the commemoration of Me. In like manner also the chalice, after He had supped, saying: This chalice is the new testament in My Blood; this do ye, as often as you shall drink, for the commemoration of Me. For as often as you shall eat this bread and drink this chalice, you shall show the death of the Lord until He come. Therefore whosoever shall eat this bread, or drink of the chalice of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and the Blood of the Lord. But let a man prove himself; and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of the chalice. For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh judgment to himself, not discerning the Body of the Lord.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 144. 15-16
OCULI ómnium in te sperant, Dómine: et tu das illis escam in témpore opportuno. V. Aperis tu manum tuam: et imples omne ánimal benedictióne.
[The eyes of all hope in Thee, O Lord, and Thou givest them meat in due season. V. Thou openest Thy hand, and fillest every living creature with Thy blessing.]
ALLELUIA - John 6. 56-57
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Caro mea vere est cibus, et sanguis meus vere est potus: qui mandúcat meam carnem, et bibit meum sánguinem, in me manet et ego is eo. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. My Flesh is meat indeed, and My Blood is drink indeed: he that eateth My Flesh and drinketh My Blood, abideth in Me, and I in him. Alleluia.]
SEQUENCE - Lauda Sion Salvatórem
1. LAUDA Sion Salvatórem, * Lauda ducem et pastórem * In hymnis et cánticis. [Sion, lift up thy voice and sing: * Praise thy Savior and thy King, * Praise with hymns thy Shepherd true.]
2. Quantum potes, tantum aude: * Quia major omni laude, * Nec laudáre súfficis. [All thou canst, do thou endeavour, * Yet thy praise can equal never * Such as merits thy great King.]
3. Laudis thema speciális, * Panis vivus et vitális, * Hódie propónitur. [See today before us laid * the living and life-giving Bread! * Theme for praise and joy profound!]
4. Quem in sacræ mensa cœnæ, * Turbæ fratrum duodénæ, * Datum non ambígitur. [The same which at the sacred board * Was, by our incarnate Lord, * Giv'n to His Apostles round.]
5. Sit laus plena, sit sonóra: * Sit jucúnda, sit decóra * Mentis jubilátio. [Let the praise be loud and high: * Sweet and tranquil be the joy * Felt today in every breast.]
6. Dies enim solémnis ágitur, * In qua mensæ prima recólitur * Hujus institútio. [On this festival divine * Which records the origin * Of the glorious Eucharist.]
7. In hac mensa novi Regis, * Novum Pascha novæ legis * Phase vetus términat. [On this table of the King, * Our new Paschal offering * Brings to end the olden rite.]
8. Vetustátem nóvitas, * Umbram fugat véritas, * Noctem lux elíminat. [Here, for empty shadows fled, * Is reality instead; * Here, instead of darkness, light.]
9. Quod in cœna Christus gessit, * Faciéndum hoc expréssit * In sui memóriam. [His own act, at supper seated, * Christ ordain'd to be repeated, * In His memory divine;]
10. Docti sacris institútis, * Panem, vinum, in salútis * Consecrámus hóstiam. [Wherefore now, with adoration, * We, the Host of our salvation, * Consecrate from bread and wine.]
11. Dogma datur Christiánis, * Quod in carnem transit panis, * Et vinum in sánguinem. [Hear, what holy Church maintaineth, * That the bread its substance changeth * Into Flesh, the wine to Blood.]
12. Quod non capis, quod non vides, * Animósa firmat fides, * Præter rerum ordinem. [Doth it pass thy comprehending? * Faith, the law of sight transcending * Leaps to things not understood, have mercy on us.]
13. Sub divérsis speciébus, * Signis tantum, et non rebus, * Latent res exímiæ. [Here beneath these signs are hidden * Priceless things, to sense forbidden * Signs, not things, are all we see.]
14. Caro cibus, sanguis potus: * Manet tamen Christus totus * Sub utráque spécie. [Flesh, from bread, and Blood from wine, * Yet is Christ in either sign, * All entire, confessed to be.]
15. A suménte non concísus, * Non confráctus, non divísus, * Integer accípitur. [They, who of Him here partake, * Sever not, nor rend, nor break: * But, entire, their Lord receive;]
16. Sumit unus, sumunt mille: * Quantum isti, tantum ille: * Nec sumptus consúmitur. [Whether one or thousands eat, * All receive the self-same meat, * Nor the less for others leave, have mercy on us.]
17. Sumunt boni, sumunt mali, * Sorte tamen inæquáli * Vitæ vel intéritus. [Both the wicked and the good * Eat of this celestial Food; * But with ends how opposite!]
18. Mors est malis, vita bonis: * Vide paris sumptiónis * Quam sit dispar éxitus. [Here it is life: and there it is death: * The same, yet issuing to each * In a difference infinite.]
19. Fracto demum Sacraménto, * Ne vacílles, sed meménto * Tantum esse sub fragménto * Quantum toto tégitur. [Nor a single doubt retain, * When they break the Host in twain, * But that in each part remains * What was in the whole before;]
20. Nulla rei fit scissúra: * Signi tantum fir fractúra: * Qua nec status nec statúra * Signáti minúitur. [Since the simple sign alone * Suffers change in state or form * The signified remaining one and the same for evermore.]
21. Ecce panis Angelórum, * Factus cibus viatórum, * Vere panis fíliórum. * Non mittendus cánibus. [Lo! upon the altar lies, * Hidden deep from human eyes, * Bread of Angels from the skies, * Made the food of mortal man;]
22. In figúris præsignátur, * Cum Isaac immolátur: * Agnus paschæ deputátur * Datur manna pátribus. [Children's meat to dogs denied, * In old types presignified: * In the manna Heaven-supplied * In Isaac, and the Paschal lamb.]
23. Bone pastor, panis vere, * Jesu, nostri miserére: * Tu nos pasce, nos tuére, * Tu nos bona fac vidére * In terra vivéntium [Jesu! Shepherd of the sheep! * Thou Thy flock in safety keep, living Bread! * Thy life supply: * Strengthen us, or else we die: * Fill us with celestial grace!]
24. Tu, qui cuncta scis et vales, * Qui nos pascis hic mortáles, * Tuos ibi commensáles, * Cohærédes et sodales, * Fac sanctórum cívium. Amen. Allelúia. [Thou, who feedest us below! * Source of all we have or know! * Grant that with Thy Saints above, sitting at the feast of love, * We may see Thee face to face. Amen. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - John 6. 56-59
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus turbis Judæórum: Caro mea vere est cibus, et sanguis meus vere est potus. Qui mandúcat meam carnem et bibit meum sánguinem, in me manet et ego in illo. Sicut misit me vivens Pater, et ego vivo propter Patrem: et qui mandúcat me, et ipse vivet propter me. Hic est panis, qui de cælo descéndit. Non sicut manducavérunt patres vestri manna, et mórtui sunt. Qui mandúcat hunc panem, vivet in ætérnum.
[At that time Jesus said to the multitudes of the Jews: My Flesh is meat indeed, and My Blood is drink indeed. He that eateth My Flesh, and drinketh My Blood, abideth in Me, and I in him. As the living Father hath sent Me, and I live by the Father, so he that eateth Me, the same also shall live by Me. This is the bread that came down from Heaven. Not as your fathers did eat manna and are dead. He that eateth this Bread shall live for ever.]
OFFERTORY - Leviticus 21. 6
SACERDÓTES Dómini incénsum et panes ófferunt Deo: et ídeo sancti erunt Deo suo, et non pólluent nomen ejus. Allelúia.
[The priests of the Lord offer incense and loaves to God, and therefore they shall be holy to their God, and shall not defile His name. Alleluia.]
SECRET
ECCLÉSIÆ tuæ, quæsumus, Dómine, unitátis et pacis propítius dona concéde: quæ sub oblátis munéribus mýstice designántur. Per Dóminum.
[We beseech Thee, O Lord, mercifully grant to Thy Church the gifts of unity and peace, which are mystically shown forth in the offerings now made. Through our Lord.]
Common Preface
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - 1 Corinthians 11. 26-27
QUOTIESCÚMQUE manducábitis panem hunc, et cálicem bibétis, mortem Dómini annuntiábitis donec véniat: ítaque quicúmque manducáverit panem vel bíberit cálicem Dómimi indígne: reus erit córporis et sánguinis Dómini. Allelúia.
[As often as you shall eat this Bread and drink the Chalice, you shall show the death of the Lord until He come: therefore whosoever shall eat this Bread or drink the Chalice of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord. Allelluia.]
POSTCOMMUNION
FAC nos, quæsumus, Dómine, divinitátis tuæ sempitérna fruitióne repléri: quam pretiósi Córporis et Sánguinis tui temporális percéptio præfigúrat: Qui vivis.
[Grant us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, to be filled with the everlasting enjoyment of Thy divinity which is prefigured by the reception in this life of Thy precious Body and Blood: Who livest.]
Ite missa est
Corpus Christi Procession
When the Celebrant and ministers leave the altar, the choir intones the hymn, Pange lingua, which begins the Corpus Christi procession. If the procession goes a long way, other hymns are also sung.
HYMN - Pange lingua
PANGE, lingua, gloriosi * Corporis mysterium, * Sanguinisque pretiosi, * quem in mundi pretium * fructus ventris generosi * Rex effudit Gentium. [Sing, my tongue, the Savior's glory, * of His Flesh, the mystery sing; * of the Blood, all price exceeding, * shed by our Immortal King, * destined, for the world's redemption, * from a noble Womb to spring.]
Nobis datus, nobis natus * ex intacta Virgine, * et in mundo conversatus, * sparso verbi semine, * sui moras incolatus * miro clausit ordine. [Of a pure and spotless Virgin * born for us on earth below, * He, as Man, with man conversing, * stayed, the seeds of truth to sow; * then He closed in solemn order * wond'rously His Life of woe.]
In supremæ nocte cœnæ * recumbens cum fratribus * observata lege plene * cibis in legalibus, * cibum turbæ duodenæ * se dat suis manibus. [On the night of that Last Supper, * seated with His chosen band, * He, the Paschal Victim eating, * first fulfils the Law's command; * then as Food to His Apostles * gives Himself with His own Hand.]
Verbum caro, panem verum * verbo carnem efficit: * fitque sanguis Christi merum, * et si sensus deficit, * ad firmandum cor sincerum * sola fides sufficit. [Word-made-Flesh, the bread of nature * by His Word to Flesh He turns; * wine into His Blood He changes; * what though sense no change discerns? * Only be the heart in earnest, * faith her lesson quickly learns.]
At the end of the procession, the choir intones the two last verses of Pange lingua, Tantum ergo, which signals the beginning of Benediction.
III - Benediction
Second Sunday after Pentecost
When the Feast of Corpus Christi is transferred to the following Sunday, the Mass, Cibavit, is celebrated as on the feast.
INTROIT - Psalm 17. 19-20
FACTUS est Dóminus protéctor meus, et edúxit me in latitúdinem: salvum me fecit, quóniam vóluit me. Ps. 17. 2. Díligam te, Dómine, virtus mea: Dóminus firmaméntum meum et refúgium meum, et liberátor meus. V. Glória Patri.
[The Lord became my protector, and He brought me forth into a large place: He saved me, because He was well pleased with me. Ps. I will love Thee, O Lord my strength: the Lord is my firmament, and my refuge, and my deliverer. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
SANCTI nóminis tui, Dómine, timórem páriter et amórem fac nos habére perpétuum: quia numquam tua gubernatióne destítuis, quos in soliditáte tuæ dilectiónis instítuis. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, O Lord, that we may have a perpetual fear and love of Thy holy name; for Thou never failest to direct and govern by Thy grace, those whom Thou bringest up in the steadfastness of Thy love. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - 1 John 3. 13-18
CARÍSSIMI: Nolíte mirári, si odit vos mundus. Nos scimus, quóniam transláti sumus de morte ad vitam, quóniam dilígimus fratres. Qui non díligit, manet in morte: omnis qui odit fratrem suum, homicída est. Et scitis quóniam omnis homicída non habet vitam ætérnam in semetípso manéntem. In hoc cognóvimus caritátem Dei, quóniam ille ánimam suam pro nobis pósuit: et nos debémus pro frátribus ánimas pónere. Qui habúerit substántiam hujus mundi, et víderit fratrem suum necessitátem habére, et cláuserit víscera sua ab eo: quómodo cáritas Dei manet in eo? Filíoli mei, non diligámus verbo, neque lingua, sed ópere et veritáte.
[Dearly beloved, wonder not if the world hate you. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. He that loveth not, abideth in death. Whosoever hateth his brother is a murderer: and you know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in himself. In this we have known the charity of God, because He hath laid down His life for us; and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. He that hath the substance of this world, and shall see his brother in need, and shall shut up his bowels from him, how doth the charity of God abide in him? My little children, let us not love in word nor in tongue, but in deed and in truth.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 119. 1-2
AD Dóminum cum tribulárer clamávi, et exaudívit me. V. Dómine, líbera ánimam meam a lábiis iníquis, et a lingua dolósa.
[IN my trouble I cried to the Lord, and He heard me. V. O Lord, deliver my soul from wicked lips and a deceitful tongue.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 7. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Dómine Deus meus, in te sperávi: salvum me fac ex ómnibus persequéntibus me, et líbera me. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. O Lord, my God, in Thee have I put my trust: save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 14. 16-24
IN illo témpore: Dixi Jesus pharisæis parábolam hanc: Homo quidam fecit cœnam magnam, et vocávit multos. Et misit servum suum hora cœnæ dícere invitátis ut venírent, quia jam paráta sunt ómnia. Et cœpérunt simul omnes excusáre. Primus dixit ei: Villam emi, et necésse hábeo exíre et vidére illam: rogo te, habe me excusátum. Et alter dixit: Juga boum emi quinque et eo probáre: rogo te, habe me excusátum. Et álius dixit: Uxórem duxi, et ídeo non possum veníre. Et revérsus servus nuntiávit hæc dómino suo. Tunc irátus paterfamílias, dixit servo suo: Exi cito in platéas et vicos civitátis: et páuperes ac débiles et cæcos, et claudos íntroduc huc. Et ait servus: Dómine, factum est ut imperásti, et adhuc locus est. Et ait dóminus servo: Exi in vias, et sepes: et compélle intráre, ut impleátur domus mea. Dico autem vobis, quod nemo virórum illórum qui vocáti sunt, gustábit cœnam meam.
[At that time, Jesus spoke to the Pharisees this parable: A certain man made a great supper, and invited many. And he sent his servant, at the hour of supper, to say to them that were invited, that they should come, for now all things are ready. And they began all at once to make excuse. The first said to him: I have bought a farm, and must needs go out, and see it, I pray thee hold me excused. And another said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to try them; I pray thee hold me excused. And another said: I have married a wife, and therefore I cannot come. And the servant returning, told these things to his lord. Then the master of the house being angry, said to his servant: Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in hither the poor, and the feeble, and the blind and the lame. And the servant said: Lord, it is done as thou hast commanded, and yet there is room. And the lord said to the servant: Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. But I say unto you, that none of these men that were invited shall taste of my supper.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 6. 5
DÓMINE, convértere, et éripe ánimam meam: salvum me fac propter misericórdiam tuam.
[Turn to me, O Lord, and deliver my soul, O save me for Thy mercy’s sake.]
SECRET
OBLÁTIO nos, Dómine, tuo nómini dicánda puríficet: et de die in diem ad cœléstis vitæ tránsferat actiónem. Per Dóminum.
[May this sacrifice to be offered in Thy name, O Lord, cleanse us from sin, that by its virtue our daily life on earth may become likened unto that of heaven. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 12. 6
CANTÁBO Dómino, qui bona tríbuit mihi: et psallam nómini Dómini altíssimi.
[I will sing to the Lord, Who giveth me good things: and I will sing to the name of the Lord the most high.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SUMPTIS munéribus sacris, quæsumus, Dómine: ut cum frequentatióne mystérii, crescat nostræ salútis efféctus. Per Dóminum.
[Having received Thy sacred gifts, O Lord, vouchsafe that the more often we frequent these divine mysteries, the more surely they may avail to our salvation. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Feast of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus
INTROIT - Psalm 32 11, 19
COGITATIÓNES Cordis ejus in generatióne et generatiónem: ut éruat a morte ánimas eórum et alat eos in fame. Ps. 32. 1. Exsultáte, justi, in Dómino, rectos decet collaudátio. V. Glória Patri.
[The thoughts of His Heart are from generation to generation: To deliver their souls from death and feed them in famine. Ps. Rejoice in the Lord, O ye just, praise becometh the upright. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, qui nobis in Corde Fílii tui, nostris vulneráto peccátis, infinítos dilectiónis thesáuros misericórditer largíri dignáris: concéde, quæsumus, ut illi devótum pietátis nostræ præstántes obséquium, dignæ quoque satisfactiónis exhibeámus offícium. Per eúmdem Dóminum.
[O God, Who in the Heart of Thy Son, wounded by our sins, dost mercifully vouchsafe to bestow upon us the infinite wealth of Thy love; grant, we beseech Thee, that revering It with meet devotion, we may fulfil our duty of worthy reparation. Through the same our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Ephesians 3. 8-19
FRATRES: Mihi ómnium sanctórum mínimo data est grátia hæc, in géntibus evangelizáre investigábiles divítias Christi: et illumináre omnes, quæ sit dispensátio sacraménti abscónditi a sæculis in Deo qui ómnia creávit: ut innotéscat principátibus et potestátibus in cœléstibus per Ecclésiam multifórmis sapiéntia Dei: secúndum præfinitiónem sæculórum, quam fecit in Christo Jesu Dómino nostro, in quo habémus fidúciam et accéssum in confidéntia per fidem ejus. Hujus rei grátia flecto génua mea ad Patrem Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, ex quo omnis patérnitas in cœlis et in terra nominátur: ut det vobis secúndum divítias glóriæ suæ, virtúte corroborári per Spíritum ejus in interiórem hóminem: Christum habitare per fidem in córdibus vestris: in caritáte radicáti et fundáti: ut possítis comprehéndere cum ómnibus sanctis, quæ sit latitúdo, et longitúdo, et sublímitas et profúndum: scire etiam supereminéntem sciéntiæ caritátem Christi, ut impleámini in omnem plentitúdinem Dei.
[Brethren: To me, the least of all the Saints, is given the grace, to preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ: and to enlighten all men, that they may see what is the dispensation of the mystery which hath been hidden from eternity in God, Who created all things: that the manifold wisdom of God may be made known to the principalities and powers in heavenly places through the Church, according to the eternal purpose which He made in Christ Jesus our Lord: in Whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the faith of Him. For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of Whom all paternity in Heaven and earth is named, that He would grant you according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened by His Spirit with might unto the inward man, that Christ may dwell by faith in your hearts: that being rooted and grounded in charity, you may be able to comprehend with all the Saints, what is the breadth and length, and height and depth: to know also the charity of Christ which surpasseth all knowledge. That you may be filled unto all the fullness of God.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 24. 8, 9
DULCIS et rectos Dóminus, propter hoc legem dabit delinquéntibus in via. V. Diriget mansuétos in judício, docébit mites vias suas.
[The Lord is sweet and righteous: therefore He will give a law to sinners in the way. V. He will guide the mild in judgment: He will teach the meek His ways.]
ALLELUIA - Matthew 11. 29
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Tóllite jugum meum super vos et díscite a me, quia mitis sum et húmilis Corde, et inveniétis réquiem animábus vestris. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Take My yoke upon you and learn of Me, because I am meek and humble of heart: and you shall find rest to your souls. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - John 19. 31-37
IN illo témpore: Judæi, quóniam Parascéve erat, ut non remanérent in cruce córpora sabbáto, erat enim magnus dies ille sábbati, rogavérunt Pilátum ut frangeréntur eórum crura et tolleréntur. Venérunt ergo mílites, et primi quidem fregérunt crura et altérius qui crucifíxus est cum eo. Ad Jesum autem cum veníssent, ut vidérunt eum jam mórtuum, non fregérunt ejus crura: sed unus mílitum láncea latus ejus apéruit, et continuo exívit sanguis et aqua. Et qui vidit testimónium perhíbuit: et verum est testimónium ejus. Et ille scit quia vera dicit, ut et vos credátis. Facta sunt enim hæc ut Scriptúra implerétur: Os non comminuétis ex eo. Et íterum ália Scriptúra dicit: Vidébunt in quem transfixérunt.
[At that time: The Jews (because it was the Parasceve), that the bodies might not remain on the cross on the Sabbath day (for that was a great Sabbath day), besought Pilate that their legs might be broken: and that they might be taken away. The soldiers therefore came: and they broke the legs of the first, and of the other that was crucified with him. But after they were come to Jesus, when they saw that He was already dead, they did not break His legs. But one of the soldiers, with a spear opened His side, and immediately there came out blood and water. And he knoweth that saw it, hath given testimony: and his testimony is true. And he knoweth that he saith true, that you may believe. For these things were done that the Scripture might be fulfilled: You shall not break a bone of Him. And again another Scripture saith: They shall look on Him Whom they pierced.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 68. 21
IMPROPÉRIUM exspectávit Cor meum et misériam, et sustínui qui simul mecum contristarétur et non fuit: consolántem me quæsivi et non invéni.
[MY Heart hath expected reproach and misery: and I looked for one that would grieve together with Me, but there was none: and for one that would comfort Me, and I found none.]
SECRET
RÉSPICE, quæsumus, Dómine, ad ineffábilem Cordis dilécti Fílii tui caritátem: ut, quod offérimus sit tibi munus accéptum et nostrórum expiátio delictórum. Per eúmdem Dóminum.
[Look, we beseech Thee, O Lord, upon the ineffable love of the Heart of Thy beloved Son; that our offering may be acceptable unto Thee and atone for all our sins. Through the same our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - John 19. 34
UNUS militum láncea latus ejus apéruit, et contínuo exívit sanguis et aqua.
[ONE of the soldiers with a spear opened His side, and immediately there came out blood and water.]
POSTCOMMUNION
PRÆBEANT nobis, Dómine Jesu, divínum tua sancta fervórem; quo dulcíssimi Cordis tui suavitáte percépta, discámus terréna despícere, et amáre cæléstia: Qui vivis et regnas.
[May Thy holy mysteries, O Lord Jesus, produce in us a divine fervour, whereby, having tasted the sweetness of Thy most dear Heart, we may learn to despise earthly things and love those of heaven: Who livest and reigneth.]
SPECIAL DEVOTIONS TO THE SACRED HEART
After Mass, the special devotions to the Most Sacred Heart of Jesus begin with Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament. The Blessed Sacrament is placed in the Monstrance at the centre of the Altar, and incensed. Then all kneel in Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament. During the singing of the Litany of the Sacred Heart, the congregation sing the responses, immediately after which the Act of Reparation to the Sacred Heart of Jesus is recited by all. Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament continues ending with Benediction.
I - Litany of the Sacred Heart
II - Act of Reparation to the Sacred Heart of Jesus
O SWEET JESUS, Whose overflowing charity for men is requited by so much forgetfulness, negligence and contempt, behold us prostrate before Thy altar eager to repair by a special act of homage the cruel indifference and injuries, to which Thine loving Heart is everywhere subject.
Mindful alas! that we ourselves have had a share in such great indignities, which we now deplore from the depths of our hearts, we humbly ask Thy pardon and declare our readiness to atone by voluntary expiation not only for our own personal offences, but also for the sins of those, who straying far from the path of salvation, refuse in their obstinate infidelity to follow Thee, their Shepherd and Leader, or, renouncing the vows of their Baptism, have cast off the sweet yoke of Thy law.
We are now resolved to expiate each and every deplorable outrage committed against Thee; we are determined to make amends for the manifold offences against Christian modesty in unbecoming dress and behaviour, for all the foul seductions laid to ensnare the feet of the innocent, for the frequent violation of Sundays and holidays, and the shocking blasphemies uttered against Thee and Thy Saints. We wish also to make amends for the insults to which Thy Vicar on earth and Thy priests are subjected, for the profanation, by conscious neglect or terrible acts of sacrilege, of the very Sacrament of Thy Divine love; and lastly for the public crimes of nations who resist the rights and the teaching authority of the Church which Thou hast founded.
Would, O Divine Jesus, we were able to wash away such abominations with our blood. We now offer, in reparation for these violations of Thy Divine honor, the satisfaction Thou didst once make to Thy eternal Father on the Cross and which Thou dost continue to renew daily on our altars; we offer it in union with the acts of atonement of Thy Virgin Mother and all the Saints and of the pious faithful on earth; and we sincerely promise to make reparation, as far as we can with the help of Thy grace, for all neglect of Thy great love and for the sins we and others have committed in the past. Henceforth we will live a life of unwavering faith, of purity of conduct, of perfect observance of the precepts of the gospel and especially that of charity. We promise to the best of our power to prevent others from offending Thee and to bring as many as possible to follow Thee.
O loving Jesus, through the intercession of the Blessed Virgin Mary our model in reparation, deign to receive the voluntary offering we make of this act of expiation; and by the crowning gift of perseverance keep us faithful unto death in our duty and the allegiance we owe to Thee, so that we may all one day come to that happy home, where Thou with the Father and the Holy Ghost livest and reignest God, world without end. Amen.
III - Benediction
Third Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 24. 16, 18
RESPICE in me, et miserére mei, Dómine: quóniam únicus, et pauper sum ego: vide humilitátem meam, et labórem meum: et dimítte ómnia peccáta mea, Deus meus. Ps. 24. 1-2. Ad te, Dómine, levávi ánimam meam: Deus meus, in te confído, non erubéscam. V. Glória Patri.
[Look Thou upon me, O Lord, and have mercy on me; for I am alone and poor. See my abjection and my labor; and forgive me all my sins, O my God. Ps. To Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul: in Thee, my God, I put my trust; let me not be ashamed. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
PROTÉCTOR in te sperántium, Deus, sine quo nihil est válidum, nihil sanctum: multíplica super nos misericórdiam tuam, ut, te rectóre, te duce, sic transeámus per bona temporália, ut non amittámus ætérna. Per Dóminum.
[O God, the protector of all that trust in Thee, without whom nothing is strong, nothing is holy, multiply Thy mercies upon us; that having Thee for our ruler and guide, we may so pass through things temporal, that we finally lose not those which are eternal. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - 1 Peter 5. 6-11
CARÍSSIME: Humiliámini sub poténti manu Dei, ut vos exáltet in témpore visitatiónis: omnem sollicitúdinem vestram projiciéntes in eum, quóniam ipsi cura est de vobis. Sóbrii estóte et vigiláte: quia adversárius vester diábolus tamquam leo rúgiens círcuit, quærens quem dévoret: cui resístite fortes in fide: sciéntes eámdem passiónem ei, quæ in mundo est, vestræ fraternitáti fíeri. Deus autem omnis grátiæ, qui vocávit nos in ætérnam suam glóriam in Christo Jesu, módicum passos ipse perfíciet, confirmábit solidabitque. Ipsi glória et impérium in sæcula sæculórum. Amen.
[Dearly beloved: Be you humbled under the mighty hand of God, that He may exalt you in the time of visitation; casting all your care upon Him, for He hath care of you. Be sober and watch, because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, goeth about seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist ye, strong in faith; knowing that the same affliction befalls your brethren who are in the world. But the God of all grace, who hath called us unto the eternal glory in Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little, will Himself perfect you, and confirm you, and establish you. To Him be glory and empire for ever and ever. Amen.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 54. 23, 17, 19
JACTA cogitátum tuum in Dómino: et ipse te enutriet. V. Dum clamárem ad Dóminum, exaudívit vocem meam ab his qui appropínquant mihi.
[Cast thy care upon the Lord and He shall sustain Thee. V. When I cried to the Lord He heard my voice, from them that draw near to me.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 7. 12
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Deus judex justus, fortis et pátiens; numquid iráscitur per síngulos dies? Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. God is a just judge, strong and patient; is He angry every day? Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 15. 10
IN illo témpore: Erant appropinquántes ad Jesum publicáni, et peccatóres, ut audírent illum. Et murmurábant pharisæi et scribæ, dicéntes: Quia hic peccatóres récipit, et mandúcat cum illis. Et ait ad illos parábolam istam, dicens: Quis ex vobis homo, qui habet centum oves: et si perdíderit unam ex illis, nonne dimíttit nonaginta nóvem in desérto, et vadit ad illam, quæ períerat, donec invéniat eam? Et cum invénerit eam, impónit in húmeros suos gaudens: et véniens domum, cónvocat amícos, et vicínos, dicens illis: Congratulámini mihi, quia invéni ovem meam, quæ períerat? Dico vobis, quod ita gáudium erit in cœlo super uno peccatóre pœniténtiam agénte, quam super nonaginta nóvem justis, qui non índigent pœniténtia. Aut quæ múlier habens drachmas decem, si perdíderit drachmam unam, nonne accéndit lucérnam, et evérrit domum, et quærit diligénter, donec invéniat? Et cum invénerit, cónvocat amícas et vicínas, dicens: Congratulámini mihi, quia invéni drachmam quam perdíderam? Ita dico vobis: gáudium erit coram Angelis Dei super uno peccatóre pœniténtiam agénte.
[At that time, the publicans and sinners drew near unto Jesus to hear Him: and the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying: This man receiveth sinners and eateth with them. And He spoke to them this parable, saying: What man is there of you that hath a hundred sheep, and if he shall lose one of them, doth he not leave the ninety-nine in the desert, and go after that which was lost, until he find it? And when he hath found it, lay it upon his shoulders rejoicing, and coming home, call together his friends and neighbors, saying to them: Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost? I say to you, that even so there shall be joy in heaven upon one sinner that doth penance, more than upon ninety-nine just who need not penance. Or what woman having ten groats, if she lose one groat, doth not light a candle, and sweep the house, and seek diligently until she find it? And when she hath found it, call together her friends and neighbors, saying: Rejoice with me, because I have found the groat which I had lost? So I say to you, there shall be joy before the angels of God upon one sinner doing penance.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 9. 11-12, 13
SPERENT in te omnes, qui novérunt nomen tuum, Dómine: quóniam non derelínquis quæréntes te: psállite Dómino, qui hábitat in Sion: quóniam non est oblítus oratiónem páuperum.
[Let them trust in Thee, all who know Thy name, O Lord: for Thou hast not forsaken them that seek Thee: sing ye to the Lord, who dwelleth in Sion: for He hath not forgotten the cry of the poor.]
SECRET
RÉSPICE, Dómine, múnera supplicántis Ecclésiæ: et salúti credéntium perpétua sanctificatióne suménda concéde. Per Dóminum.
[Look, O Lord, upon the offerings of Thy suppliant Church, and grant to Thy faithful receiving them, that they may avail unto salvation. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Luke 15. 10
DICO vobis: gáudium est Angelis Dei super uno peccatóre pœniténtiam agénte.
[I say to you: there is joy before the angels of God upon one sinner doing penance.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SANCTA tua nos, Dómine, sumpta vivíficent: et misericórdiæ sempitérnæ præparent expiátos. Per Dóminum.
[May the Sacrament which we have received quicken us, O Lord: and atoning for our sins, prepare us to share everlastingly in Thy mercies. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Fourth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 26. 1, 2
DOMINUS illuminátio mea, et salus mea, quem timébo? Dóminus defénsor vitæ meæ, a quo trepidábo? Qui tríbulant me inimíci mei, ipsi infirmáti sunt, et cecidérunt. Ps. 26. 3. Si consístant advérsum me castra: non timébit cor meum. V. Glória Patri.
[The Lord is my light and my salvation: whom shall I fear? The Lord is the protector of my life: of whom shall I be afraid? My enemies that trouble me have themselves been weakened and have fallen. Ps. If armies in camp should stand together against me, my heart shall not fear. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DA nobis, quæsumus, Dómine: ut et mundi cursus pacífice nobis tuo órdine dirigátur; et Ecclésia tua tranquílla devotióne lætétur. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by Thee, that Thy Church may joyfully serve Thee in quiet devotion. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Romans 8. 18-23
FRATRES: Exístimo quod non sunt condígnæ passiónes hujus témporis ad futúram glóriam quæ revelábitur in nobis. Nam exspectátio creatúræ revelatiónem filiórum Dei exspéctat. Vanitáti enim creatúra subjécta est, non volens, sed propter eum, qui subjécit eam in spe: quia et ipsa creatúra liberábitur a servitúte corruptiónis, in libertátem glóriæ filiórum Dei. Scimus enim quod omnis creatúra ingemíscit et párturit usque adhuc. Non solum autem illa, sed et nos ipsi primítias spíritus habéntes: et ipsi intra nos gémimus, adoptiónem filiórum Dei exspectántes, redemptiónem córporis nostri: in Christo Jesu Dómino nostro.
[Brethren, I reckon that the sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the glory to come, that shall be revealed in us. For the expectation of the creature waiteth for the revelation of the sons of God. For the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him that made it subject in hope; because the creature also itself shall be delivered from the servitude of corruption, into the liberty of the glory of the children of God. For we know that every creature groaneth, and travaileth in pain, even till now; and not only it, but ourselves also, who have the first-fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption of the sons of God, the redemption of our body; in Christ Jesus our Lord.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 78. 9, 10
PROPÍTIUS esto, Dómine, peccátis nostris: nequándo dicant gentes: Ubi est Deus eórum? V. Adjuva nos, Deus salutáris noster, et propter honórem nóminis tui, Dómine, líbera nos.
[Forgive us our sins, O Lord, lest the Gentiles should at any time say: Where is their God? V. Help us, O God, our Savior; and for the honor of Thy name, O Lord, deliver us.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 9. 5, 10
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Deus, qui sedes super thronum, et júdicas æquitátem: esto refúgium páuperum in tribulatióne. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. O God, who sittest upon the throne, and judgest justice, be Thou the refuge of the poor in tribulation. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 5. 1-11
IN illo témpore: Cum turbæ irrúerent in Jesum, ut audírent verbum Dei, et ipse stabat secus stagnum Genésareth. Et vidit duas naves stantes secus stagnum: piscatóres autem descénderant et lavábant rétia. Ascéndens autem in unam navim, quæ erat Simónis, rogávit eum a terra redúcere pusíllum. Et sedens docébat de navícula turbas. Ut cessávit autem loqui, dixit ad Simónem: Duc in altum, et laxáte rétia vestra in captúram. Et respóndens Simon dixit illi: Præcéptor, per totam noctem laborántes, nihil cépimus: in verbo autem tuo laxábo rete. Et cum hoc fecíssent, conclusérunt píscium multitúdinem copiósam: rumpebátur autem rete eórum. Et annuérunt sóciis, qui erant in ália navi, ut venírent et adjuvárent eos. Et venérunt, et implevérunt ambas navículas, ita ut pene mergeréntur. Quod cum vidéret Simon Petrus, prócidit ad génua Jesu, dicens: Exi a me, quia homo peccátor sum, Dómine. Stupor enim circumdéderat eum et omnes qui cum illo erant, in captúra píscium quam céperant: simíliter autem Jacóbum et Joánnem, fílios Zebedæi, qui erant sócii Simónis. Et ait ad Simónem Jesus: Noli timére: ex hoc jam hómines eris cápiens. Et subdúctis ad terram návibus, relíctis ómnibus, secúti sunt eum.
[At that time, when the multitude pressed upon Jesus to hear the word of God, He stood by the lake of Genesareth. And He saw two ships standing by the lake; but the fishermen were gone out of them, and were washing their nets; and going up into one of the ships that was Simon’s, He desired him to draw back a little from the land: and sitting He taught the multitudes out of the ship. Now when He had ceased to speak, He said to Simon: Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught. And Simon, answering, said to Him: Master, we have labored all the night, and have taken nothing, but at Thy word I will let down the net. And when they had done this, they enclosed a very great multitude of fishes; and their net broke: and they beckoned to their partners that were in the other ship, that they should come and help them; and they came, and filled both the ships, so that they were almost sinking. Which when Simon Peter saw, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying: Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord. For he was wholly astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught of fishes which they had taken: and so were also James and John the Sons of Zebedee, who were Simon’s partners. And Jesus saith to Simon: Fear not, from henceforth thou shalt catch men. And having brought their ships to land, leaving all things they followed him.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 12. 4-5
ILLÚMINA óculos meos, ne unquam obdórmiam in morte: nequándo dicat inimícus meus: Præválui advérsus eum.
[Enlighten my eyes, that I never sleep in death; lest at any time my enemy say: I have prevailed against him.]
SECRET
OBLATIÓNIBUS nostris, quæsúmus, Dómine, placáre suscéptis: et ad te nostras étiam rebélles compélle propítius voluntátes. Per Dóminum.
[We beseech Thee, O Lord, be pleased to accept these our offerings; and in Thy mercy draw even our rebellious wills unto Thee. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 17. 3
DÓMINUS firmaméntum meum, et refúgium meum, et liberátor meus: Deus meus adjútor meus.
[The Lord is my firmament, and my refuge, and my deliverer, my God is my helper.]
POSTCOMMUNION
MYSTÉRIA nos, Dómine, quæsumus, sumpta puríficent: et suo múnere tueántur. Per Dóminum.
[May the mysteries which we have received, O Lord, purify our hearts and by their power may we be defended. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Fifth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm. 26. 7, 9
EXAUDI, Dómine, vocem meam, qua clamávi ad te: adjútor meus esto, ne derelínquas me, neque despícias me, Deus salutáris meus. Ps. 26. 2. Dóminus illuminátio mea, et salus mea, quem timébo? V. Glória Patri.
[Hear O Lord, my voice with which I have cried to Thee: be Thou my helper, forsake me not, nor do Thou despise me, O God, my Savior. Ps. The Lord is my light, and my salvation, whom shall I fear? V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, qui diligéntibus te bona invisibília præparásti: infúnde córdibus nostris tui amóris afféctum: ut te in ómnibus et super ómnia diligentes, promissiónes tuas, quæ omne desidérium súperant, consequámur. Per Dóminum.
[O God, Who hast prepared for those who love Thee such good things as eye hath not seen; pour into our hearts such love towards Thee, that loving Thee above all things, we may obtain Thy promises, which exceed all that we can desire. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - I Peter 3. 8-15
CARÍSSIMI: Omnes unánimes in oratióne estóte, compatiéntes, fraternitátis amatóres, misericórdes, modésti, húmiles: non reddéntes malum pro malo, nec maledíctum pro maledícto: sed e contrário benedicéntes: quia in hoc vocáti estis, ut benedictiónem hereditáte possideátis. Qui enim vult vitani dilígere et dies vidére bonos, coérceat linguam suam a malo, et lábia ejus ne loquántur dolum. Declínet a malo, et fáciat bonum: inquírat pacem, et sequátur eam. Quia óculi Dómini super justos, et aures ejus in preces eórum: vultus autem Dómini super faciéntes mala. Et quis est qui vobis nóceat, si boni æmulatóres fuéritis? Sed et si quid patímini propter justítiam beáti. Timórem autem eórum ne timuéritis: et non conturbémini. Dóminum autem Christum sanctificáte in cordibus vestris.
[Dearly beloved: Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another, being lovers of the brotherhood, merciful, modest, humble; not rendering evil for evil, nor railing for railing, but contrariwise, blessing: for unto this are you called, that you may inherit a blessing. For he that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him decline from evil and do good; let him seek after peace, and pursue it; because the eyes of the Lord are upon the just, and His ears unto their prayers, but the countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil things. And who is he that can hurt you, if you be zealous of good? But if also you suffer anything for justice’s sake, blessed are ye. And be not afraid of their fear, and be not troubled; but sanctify the Lord Christ in your hearts.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 83. 10, 9
PROTÉCTOR noster áspice, Deus: et réspice super servos tuos. V. Dómine Deus virtútum, exáudi preces servórum tuórum.
[Behold, O God our protector, and look on Thy servants. V. O Lord God of hosts, give ear to the prayers of Thy servants.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 20. 1
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Dómine, in virtúte tua lætábitur rex; et super salutáre tuum exsultábit veheménter. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. In Thy strength, O Lord, the king shall joy; and in Thy salvation he shall rejoice exceedingly. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 5. 20-24
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis: Nisi abundáverit justítia vestra plus quam scribárum et pharisæórum, non intrábitis in regnum cœlórum. Audístis, quia dictum est antíquis: Non occides: qui autem occíderit, reus erit judício. Ego autem dico vobis: quia omnis, qui iráscitur fratri suo, reus erit judício. Qui autem dixerit fratri suo, raca: reus erit concílio. Qui autem díxerit, fátue: reus erit géhennæ ignis. Si ergo offers munus tuum ad altáre, et ibi recordátus fúeris quia frater tuus habet áliquid advérsum te: relínque ibi munus tuum ante altáre, et vade prius reconciliári fratri tuo: et tunc véniens ófferes munus tuum.
[At that time, Jesus said to His disciples: Except your justice abound more than that of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. You have heard that it was said to them of old: Thou shalt not kill; and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment. But I say to you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment; and whosoever shall say to his brother: Raca, shall be in danger of the council; and whosoever shall say: Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. If therefore thou offer thy gift at the altar, and there thou remember that thy brother hath anything against thee, leave there thy offering before the altar, and go first to be reconciled to thy brother; and then coming thou shalt offer thy gift.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 15. 7, 8
BENEDÍCAM Dóminum, qui tribuit mihi intelléctum: providébam Deum in conspéctu meo semper: quóniam a dextris es mihi, ne commóvear.
[I will bless the Lord, who hath given me understanding; I set God always in my sight; for He is at my right hand, that I be not moved.]
SECRET
PROPITIÁRE, Dómine, supplicatiónibus nostris: et has oblatiónes famulórum famularúmque tuárum benígnus assúme: ut, quod sínguli obtulérunt ad honórem nominis tui, cunctis profíciat ad salútem. Per Dóminum.
[Be appeased, we beseech Thee, O Lord, by our supplications: and in Thy loving kindness, accept the offerings Thy servants and handmaidens lay before Thee, that the offerings of each to the glory of Thy name may profit all alike unto salvation. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 26. 4
UNAM pétii a Dómino, hanc requíram: ut inhábitem in domo Dòmini ómnibus diébus vitæ meæ.
[One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I seek after: that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life.]
POSTCOMMUNION
QUOS cœlésti, Dómine, dono satiásti: præsta, quæsumus: ut a nostris mundémur occúltis, et ab hóstiam liberémur insídiis. Per Dóminum.
[Thou hast filled us with thy heavenly gifts, O Lord: vouchsafe, we beseech Thee, to cleanse us from our hidden faults, and deliver us from the snares of our enemies. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Sixth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm. 27. 8, 9
DOMINUS fortitúdo plebis suæ et protector salutárium Christi sui est: salvum fac pópulum tuum, Dómine, et bénedic hereditáti tuæ, et rege eos usque in sæculum. Ps. 27. 1. Ad te, Dómine, clamábo, Deus meus, ne síleas a me: nequando táceas a me, et assimilábor descendéntibus in lacum. V. Glória Patri.
[The Lord is the strength of His people, and the protector of the salvation of His anointed: save, O Lord, Thy people, and bless Thine inheritance, and rule them for ever. Ps. Unto Thee will I cry, O Lord: O my God, be not Thou silent to me, lest if Thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS virtútum, cujus est totum quod est óptimum: insere pectóribus nostris amórem tui nóminis, et præsta in nobis religiónis augméntum; ut, quæ sunt bona, nútrias, ac pietátis stúdio, quæ sunt nutríta, custódias. Per Dominum.
[O God of hosts, to Whom all that is best belong, graft in our hearts the love of Thy name, and grant us an increase of true religion: that Thou mayest foster what is good, and with tender zeal guard what Thou hast fostered. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Romans 6. 3-11
FRATRES: Quicúmque baptizáti sumus in Christo Jesu, in morte ipsíus baptizáti sumus. Consepúlti enim sumus cum illo per baptísmum in mortem: ut quómodo Christus surréxit a mórtuis per glóriam Patris, ita et nos in novitáte vitæ ambulémus. Si enim complantáti facti sumus similitúdini mortis ejus: simul et resurrectiónis érimus. Hoc sciéntes, quia vetus homo noster simul crucifíxus est: ut destruátur corpus peccáti, et ultra non serviámus peccáto. Qui enim mórtuus est, justificátus est a peccáto. Si autem mórtui sumus cum Christo: crédimus quia simul étiam vivémus cum Christo: sciéntes quod Christus resúrgens ex mórtuis, jam non móritur, mors illi ultra non dominábitur. Quod enim mórtuus est peccáto, mórtuus est semel: quod autem vivit, vivit Deo. Ita et vos existimáte vos mórtuos quidem esse peccáto, vivéntes autem Deo, in Christo Jesu Dómino nostro.
[Brethren, all we who are baptized in Christ Jesus are baptized in His death. For we are buried together with Him by baptism unto death; that as Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also may walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted together in the likeness of His death, we shall also be in the likeness of His Resurrection. Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin may be destroyed, and that we may serve sin no longer. For he that is dead is justified from sin. Now if ye be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live also together with Christ. Knowing that Christ, rising again from the dead, dieth now no more, death shall no more have dominion over Him. For in that He died to sin, He died once; but in that He liveth, He liveth unto God. So do you also reckon yourselves to be dead indeed to sin, but alive to God; in Christ Jesus our Lord.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 89. 13, 1
CONVÉRTERE, Domine, aliquántulum, et deprecáre super servos tuos. V. Dómine, refúgium factus es nobis, a generatióne et progénie.
[Return, O Lord: a little; and be entreated in favor of Thy servants. V. Lord, Thou hast been our refuge from generation to generation.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 30, 2-3
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. In te, Dómine, sperávi, non confúndar in ætérnum: in justítia tua líbera me, et éripe me: inclína ad me aurem tuam, accélera, ut erípias me. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped, let me never be confounded: deliver me in Thy justice, and release me: bow down Thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Mark 8. 1-91
IN illo tempore: Cum turba multa esset cum Jesu, nec habérent quod manducárent, convocátis discípulis, ait illis: Miséreor super turbam: quia ecce jam tríduo sústinent me, nec habent quod mandúcent: et si dimísero eos jejúnos in domum suam, defícient in via: quidam enim ex eis de longe venérunt. Et respondérunt ei discípuli sui: Unde illos quis póterit hic saturáre pánibus in solitúdine? Et interrogávit eos: Quot panes habétis? Qui dixérunt: Septem. Et præcépit turbæ discúmbere super terram. Et accípiens septem panes, grátias agens fregit, et dabat discípulis suis ut appónerent, et apposuérunt turbæ. Et habébant piscículos paucos: et ipsos benedíxit, et jussit appóni. Et manducavérunt, et saturáti sunt, et sustulérunt quod superáverat de fragméntis, septem sportas. Erant autem qui manducáverant, quasi quátuor míllia: et dimisit eos.
[At that time, when there was a great multitude with Jesus, and they had nothing to eat, calling His disciples together, He saith to them: I have compassion on the multitude, for behold they have now been with Me three days, and have nothing to eat; and if I shall send them away fasting to their home, they will faint in the way: for some of them came from afar off. And His disciples answered Him: From whence can any one fill them here with bread in the wilderness? And He asked them: How many loaves have ye? Who said: Seven. And He commanded the people to sit down on the ground. And taking the seven loaves, giving thanks, He broke and gave to His disciples to set before the people. And they had a few little fishes, and He blessed them, and commanded them to be set before them. And they did eat, and were filled; and they took up that which was left of the fragments, seven baskets: and they that had eaten were about four thousand: and He sent them away.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 16. 5, 6-7
PÉRFICE gressus meos in sémitis tuis, ut non moveántur vestígia mea: inclína aurem tuam, et exáudi verba mea: mirífica misericórdias tuas, qui salvos facis sperántes in te, Dómine.
[Perfect Thou my goings in Thy paths, that my footsteps be not moved: incline Thy ear, and hear my words: show forth Thy wonderful mercies, Thou who savest them that trust in Thee, O Lord.]
SECRET
PROPITIÁRE, Dómine, supplicatiónibus nostris, et has pópuli tui oblatiónes benígnus assúme: et ut nullíus sit írritum votum, nullíus vácua postulátio, præsta; ut, quod fidéliter pétimus, efficáciter consequámur. Per Dóminum.
[Be appeased, O Lord, by our supplications, and graciously accept these offerings of Thy people: neither suffering the hope of anyone to be in vain, nor his prayer to remain unheard, that we may obtain that for which we faithfully pray. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 26. 6
CIRCUÍBO et immolábo in tabernáculo ejus hóstiam jubilatiónis: cantábo et psalmum dicam Dómino.
[I will go round, and offer up in His tabernacle a sacrifice of jubilation; I will sing, and recite a psalm to the Lord.]
POSTCOMMUNION
REPLÉTI sumus, Dómine, munéribus tuis: tríbue, quæsumus; ut eórum et mundémur efféctu et muniámur auxílio. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, O Lord, that we who have been filled with Thy gifts, may be cleansed by their virtue and strengthened by their help. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Seventh Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 46. 2
OMNES gentes, pláudite manibús: jubiláte Deo in voce exsultatiónis. Ps. 46. 3. Quóniam Dóminus excélsus, terribílis: Rex magnus super omnem terram. V. Glória Patri.
[Clap your hands, all ye nations: shout unto God with the voice of joy. Ps. For the Lord is most high, He is terrible; He is a great King over all the earth. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, cujus providéntia in sui dispositióne non fállitur: te súpplices exorámus: ut nóxia cuncta submóveas, et ómnia nobis profutúra concédas. Per Dóminum.
[O God, Whose providence in the ordering of all things never fails; we humbly beseech Thee to put away from us all harmful things, and to give us those which are profitable for us. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Romans 6. 19-23
FRATRES: Humánum dico, propter infirmitátem carnis vestræ: sicut enim exhibuístis membra vestra servíre immundítiæ, et iniquitáti ad iniquitátem, ita nunc exhibéte membra vestra servíre justítiæ in sanctificatiónem. Cum enim servi essétis peccáti, líberi fuístis justítiæ. Quem ergo fructum habuístis tunc in illis, in quibus nunc erubéscitis? Nam finis illòrum mors est. Nunc vero liberáti a peccáto, servi autem facti Deo, habétis fructum vestrum in sanctificatiónem, finem vero vitam ætérnam. Stipéndia enim peccáti mors. Grátia autem Dei vita ætérna, in Christo Jesu Dómino nostro.
[Brethren: I speak a human thing, because of the infirmity of your flesh; for as you have yielded your members to serve uncleanness and iniquity unto iniquity, so now yield your members to serve justice unto sanctification. For when you were the servants of sin, you were free from just ice. What fruit therefore had you then in those things, of which you are now ashamed? For the end of them is death. But now being made free from sin, and become servants to God, you have your fruit unto sanctification, and the end life everlasting. For the wages of sin is death. But the grace of God is life everlasting; in Christ Jesus our Lord.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 33. 12, 6
VENITE, filli, audite me: timorem Domini docebo vos. V. Accedite ad eum, et illuminamini: et facies vestræ non confundentur.
[Come children, hearken to me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. V. Come ye to Him and be enlightened; and your faces shall not be confounded.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 46. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Omnes gentes, pláudite mánibus: jubiláte Deo in voce exsultatiónis. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. O clap your hands, all ye nations; shout unto God with the voice of joy. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Mark 7. 15-21
IN illo tempore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis: Atténdite a falsis prophétis, qui véniunt ad vos in vestiméntis óvium, intrínsecus autem sunt lupi rapáces: a frúctibus eórum cognoscétis eos. Numquid cólligunt de spinis uvas, aut de tríbulis ficus? Sic omnis arbor bona fructus bonos facit: mala autem arbor malos fructus facit. Non potest arbor bona malos fructus fácere: neque arbor mala bonos fructus facere. Omnis arbor, quæ non facit fructum bonum, excidétur, et in ignem mittétur. Igitur ex frúctibus eórum cognoscétis eos. Non omnis qui dicit mihi, Dómine, Dómine, intrábit in regnum cælórum: sed qui facit voluntátem Patris mei, qui in cælis est, ipse intrábit in regnum cælórum.
[At that time, Jesus said to His disciples: Beware of false prophets, who come to you in the clothing of sheep, but inwardly they are ravening wolves. By their fruits you shall know them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Even so every good tree bringeth forth good fruit, and the evil tree bringeth forth evil fruit. A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil tree bring forth good fruit. Every tree that bringeth not forth good fruit shall be cut down, and shall be cast into the fire. Wherefore by their fruits you shall know them. Not every one that saith to Me: Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; but he that doeth the will of My Father who is in heaven, he shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.]
OFFERTORY - Daniel 3. 40
SICUT in holocáustis aríetum et taurórum, et sicut in míllibus agnórum pínguium: sic fiat sacrifícium nostrum in conspéctu tuo hódie, ut pláceat tibi: quia non est confúsio confidéntibus in te, Dómine.
[As in holocausts of rams and bullocks, and as in thousands of fat lambs; so let our sacrifice be made in Thy sight this day, that it may please Thee: for there is no confusion to them that trust in Thee, O Lord.]
SECRET
DEUS, qui legálium differéntiam hostiárum uníus sacrifícii perfectióne sanxísti: áccipe sacrifícium a devótis tibi fámulis, et pari benedictióne, sicut múnera Abel, sanctifica: ut, quod sínguli obtulérunt ad majestátis tuæ honórem, cunctis profíciat ad salútem. Per Dóminum.
[O God Who, in this one sacrifice, hast perfected the offering of the many victims prescribed under the Old Law: receive this same sacrifice offered by Thy devoted servants and sanctify it with a blessing, like unto that which Thou didst bestow upon the offerings of Abel; so that what each has offered here to the glory of Thy name, may profit all unto salvation. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 30. 3
INCLÍNA aurem tuam, accélera ut erípias me.
[BOW down Thy ear, make haste to deliver me.]
POSTCOMMUNION
TUA nos, Dómine, medicinális operátio, et a nostris perversitàtibus cleménter expédiat, et ad ea quæ sunt recta perdúcat. Per Dóminum.
[May Thy healing work in our souls mercifully free us from our perverse inclinations O Lord, and lead us ever to do that which is right in Thy sight. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Eighth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 47. 10, 11
SUSCEPIMUS, Deus, misericórdiam tuam in médio templi tui: secúndum nomen tuum, Deus, ita et laus tua in fines terræ: justítia plena est déxtera tua. Ps. 47. 2. Magnus Dóminus, et laudábilis nimis: in civitáte Dei nostri, in monte sancto ejus. V. Gloria Patri.
[We have received Thy mercy, O God, in the midst of Thy temple; according to Thy name, O God, so also is Thy praise unto the ends of the earth: Thy right hand is full of justice. Ps. Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised, in the city of God, in His holy mountain. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
LARGÍRE nobis, quæsumus, Dómine, semper spíritum cogitándi quæ recta sunt, propítius et agéndi: ut, qui sine te esse non póssumus, secúndum te vívere valeámus. Per Dóminum.
[Grant to us, O Lord, we beseech Thee, the spirit to think and do always such things as are right; that we who cannot exist without Thee, may be able to live according to Thy will. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Romans 8. 12-17
FRATRES: Debitóres sumus non carni, ut secúndum carnem vivámus. Si enim secúndum carnem vixéritis, moriémini: si autem spíritu facta carnis mortificavéritis, vivétis. Quicúmque enim spíritu Dei agúntur, ii sunt fílii Dei. Non enim accepístis spíritum servitútis íterum in timóre, sed accepístis spíritum adoptiónis filiórum in quo clamámus: Abba (Pater). Ipse enim Spíritus testimónium reddit spirítui nostro quod sumus fílii Dei. Si autem fílii, et herédes: herédes quidem Dei, coherédes autem Christi.
[Brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live according to the flesh; for if you live according to the flesh, you shall die; but if by the Spirit you mortify the deeds of the flesh, you shall live. For whosoever are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For you have not received the spirit of bondage again in fear, but you have received the spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry: Abba (Father). For the Spirit Himself giveth testimony to our spirit, that we are the sons of God; and if sons, heirs also; heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs with Christ.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 30. 3; 70. 1
ESTO mihi in Deum protectórem, et in locum refúgii, ut salvum me fácias. V. Deus, in te sperávi: Dómine, non confúndar in ætérnum.
[Be Thou unto me a God, a protector, and a place of refuge, to save me. V. In Thee, O God, have I hoped: O Lord, let me never be confounded.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 47. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Magnus Dóminus et laudábilis valde, in civitáte Dei nostri, in monte sancto ejus. Alleluia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised, in the city of our God, in His holy mountain. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 16. 1-9
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis parábolam hanc: Homo quidam erat dives, qui habébat víllicum: et hic diffamátus est apud illum, quasi dissipásset bona ipsíus. Et vocávit illum et sit illi: Quid hoc áudio de te? redde ratiónem villicatiónis tuæ: jam enim non póteris villicáre. Ait autem víllicus intra se: Quid fáciam, quia Dóminus meus aufert a me villicatiónem? Fódere non váleo, mendicáre erubésco. Scio quid fáciam, ut, cum amótus fúero a villicatióne, recípiant me in domos suas. Convocátis itaque síngulis debitóribus dómini sui, dicébat primo: Quantum debes dómino meo? At ille dixit: Centum cados ólei. Dixítque illi: Accipe cautiónem tuam: et sede cito, scribe quinquagínta. Deínde álii dixit: Tu vero quantum debes? Qui ait: Centum coros trítici. Ait illi: Accipe lítteras tuas, et scribe octogínta. Et laudávit dóminus víllicum iniquitátis, quia prudénter fecísset: quia fílii hujus sæculi prudentióres fíliis lucis in generatióne sua sunt. Et ego vobis dico: fácite vobis amicos de mammóna iniquitátis: ut, cum defecéritis, recípiant vos in ætérna tabernácula.
[At that time, Jesus spoke to His disciples this parable: There was a certain rich man who had a steward; and the same was accused unto him that he had wasted his goods; and he called him, and said to him: How is it that I hear this of thee? Give an account of thy stewardship, for now thou canst be steward no longer. And the steward said within himself: What shall I do, because my lord taketh away from me the stewardship? To.dig, I am not able: to beg, I am ashamed. I know what I will do, that when I shall be put out of the stewardship, they may receive me into their houses. Therefore calling together every one of his lord’s debtors, he said to the first: How much dost thou owe my lord? But he said: A hundred barrels of oil. And he said to him: Take thy bill, and sit down quickly, and write fifty. Then he said to another: And how much dost thou owe? Who said: A hundred quarters of wheat. He said to him: Take thy bill, and write eighty. And the lord commended the unjust steward, for as much as he had done wisely: for the children of this world are wiser in their generation than the children of light. And I say to you: Make unto you friends of the mammon of iniquity, that when you shall fail, they may receive you into everlasting dwellings.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 17. 28, 32
PÓPULUM húmilem salvum fácies, Dómine, et óculos superbórum humiliábis: quóniam quis Deus præter te, Domine?
[Thou wilt save the humble people, O Lord, and wilt bring down the eyes of the proud; for who is God but Thee, O Lord?]
SECRET
SÚSCIPE, quæsumus, Dómine, múnera, quæ tibi de tua largitáte deférimus: ut hæc sacrosáncta mystéria, grátiæ tuæ operánte virtúte, et præséntis vitæ nos conversatióne sanctíficent, et ad gáudia sempitérna perdúcant. Per Dóminum.
[Receive, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the gifts of Thy bounty which we bring to Thee, and by the power of Thy grace, may these holy mysteries sanctify our lives in this world and bring us to the joys of eternity. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 33. 9
GUSTÁTE et vidéte quóniam suávis est Dóminus: beátus vir qui sperat in eo.
[Taste and see that the Lord is sweet: blessed is the man that hopeth in Him.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SIT nobis, Dómine, reparátio mentis et córporis cæléste mystérium: ut, cujus exséquimur cultum, sentiámus efféctum. Per Dóminum.
[May this heavenly mystery, O Lord, heal us both in soul and in body: and may we ever feel within us the power of the sacrament we celebrate. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Ninth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 53. 6-7
ECCE Deus ádjuvat me, et Dóminus suscéptor est ánimæ meæ: avérte mala inimícis meis, et in veritáte tua dispérde illos, protéctor meus, Dómine. Ps. 53. 3. Deus, in nómine tuo salvum me fac: et in virtúte tua líbera me. V. Gloria Patri.
[Behold, God is my helper, and the Lord is the protector of my soul: turn back the evils upon mine enemies, and cut them off in Thy truth, O Lord my protector. Ps. Save me, O God, by Thy name, and deliver me in Thy strength. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
PÁTEANT aures misericórdiæ tuæ, Dómine, précibus supplicántium: et ut peténtibus desideráta concédas; fac eos, quæ tibi sunt plácita, postuláre. Per Dóminum.
[Let Thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of Thy suppliant people; and that Thou mayest grant them their petitions, make them to ask such things as shall please Thee. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Corinthians 10. 6-13
FRATRES: Non simus concupiscéntes malórum, sicut et illi concupiérunt. Neque idolólatræ efficiámini, sicut quidam ex ipsis: quemadmodum scriptum est: Sedit pópulus manducáre et bíbere, et surrexérunt lúdere. Neque fornicémur, sicut quidam ex ipsis fornicáti sunt, et cecidérunt una die vigínti tria míllia. Neque tentémus Christum, sicut quidam eórum tentavérunt, et a serpéntibus periérunt. Neque murmuravéritis, sicut quidam eórum murmuravérunt, et periérunt ab exterminatóre. Hæc autem ómnia in figúra contingébant illis: scripta sunt autem ad correptiónem nostram, in quos fines sæculórum devenérunt. Itaque qui se exístimat stare, videat ne cadat. Tentatio vos non apprehéndat, nisi humána: fidélis autem Deus est, qui non patiétur vos tentári supra id quod potéstis, sed fáciet étiam cum tentatióne provéntum, ut possítis sustinére.
[Brethren, let us not covet evil things, as they also coveted. Neither become ye idolaters, as some of them: as it is written: The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed fornication, and there fell in one day three and twenty thousand. Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them tempted, and perished by the serpents. Neither do you murmur, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed by the destroyer. Now all these things happened to them in figure, and they are written for our correction, upon whom the ends of the world are come. Wherefore he that thinketh himself to stand, let him take heed lest he fall. Let no temptation take hold on you, but such as is human: and God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you are able; but will make also with temptation issue, that you may be able to bear it.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 8. 2
DÓMINE Dóminus noster, quam admirábile est nomen tuum in univérsa terra! V. Quóniam eleváta est magnificéntia tua super cælos.
[O Lord, our Lord, how admirable is Thy name in the whole earth! V. For Thy magnificence is elevated above the heavens.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 58. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Eripe me de inimícis meis, Deus meus: et ab insurgéntibus in me líbera me. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Deliver me from my enemies, O my God: and defend me from them that rise up against me. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 19. 41-47
IN illo témpore: Cum appropinquáret Jesus Jerúsalem, videns civitátem, flevit super illam, dicens: Quia si cognovísses et tu, et quidem in hac die tua, quæ ad pacem tibi, nunc autem abscóndita sunt ab óculis tuis. Quia vénient dies in te: et circúmdabunt te inimíci tui vallo, et circúmdabunt te: et coangustábunt te úndique: et ad terram prostérnent te, et fílios tuos, qui in te sunt, et non relínquent in te lápidem super lápidem: eo quod non cognóveris tempus visitatiónis tuæ. Et ingréssus in templum, cœpit ejícere vendéntes in illo et eméntes, dicens illis: Scriptum est: Quia domus mea domus oratiónis est. Vos autem fecístis illam spelúncam latrónum. Et erat docens quotídie in templo.
[At that time, when Jesus drew near to Jerusalem, seeing the city, He wept over it saying: If thou also hadst known, and that in this day, the things that are to thy peace: but now they are hidden from thy eyes. For the days shall come upon thee, and thy enemies shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and straiten thee on every side; and beat thee flat to the ground, and thy children who are in thee; and they shall not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou hast not known the time of thy visitation. And entering into the temple, He began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought, saying to them: It is written, My house is the house of prayer, but you have made it a den of thieves. And He was teaching daily in the temple.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 18. 9-12
JUSTÍTIÆ Dómini rectæ, lætificántes corda, et judícia ejus dulcióra super mel et favum: nam et servus tuus custódit ea.
[The justices of the Lord are right, rejoicing hearts, and His judgments sweeter than honey and the honeycomb: for thy servant keepeth them.]
SECRET
CONCÉDE nobis, quæsumus, Dómine, hæc digne frequentáre mystéria: quia, quóties hujus hóstiæ commemorátio celebrátur, opus nostræ redemptiónis exercétur. Per Dóminum.
[Grant us, we beseech Thee, O Lord, worthily to frequent these sacred mysteries: for as often as this memorial sacrifice is offered, the work of our redemption is wrought. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - John 6. 57
QUI mandúcat meam carnem et bibit meum sánguinem, in me manet et ego in eo, dicit Dóminus.
[HE that eateth My Flesh, and drinketh My Blood, abideth in Me, and I in him, saith the Lord.]
POSTCOMMUNION
TUI nobis, quæsumus, Dómine, commúnio sacraménti, et purificatiónem cónferat, et tríbuat unitátem. Per Dóminum.
[May our reception of Thy holy Sacrament, O Lord, both purify us from sin and grant us unity in Thy service. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Tenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 54. 17-23
CUM clamárem ad Dóminum, exaudívit vocem meam ab his qui appropínquant mihi: et humiliávit eos qui est ante sæcula, et manet in ætérnum: jacta cogitátum tuum in Dómino, et ipse te enútriet. Ps. 54. 2. Exáudi, Deus, oratiónem meam, et ne despéxeris deprecatiónem meam: inténde mihi, et exáudi me. V. Gloria Patri.
[When I cried to the Lord He heard my voice, from them that draw near to me; and He humbled them, who is before all ages, and remains for ever: cast thy care upon the Lord, and He shall sustain thee. Ps. Hear, O God, my prayer, and despise not my supplication; be attentive to me and hear me. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, qui omnipoténtiam tuam parcéndo máxime et miserándo maniféstas: multiplica super nos misericórdiam tuam; ut ad tua promíssa curréntes, cæléstium bonórum fácias esse consórtes. Per Dóminum.
[O God, who dost manifest Thy almighty power chiefly in showing mercy and pity; increase Thy mercy towards us, that we, seeking the way of Thy promises, may be made partakers of Thy heavenly treasures. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - I Corinthians 12. 2-11
FRATRES: Scitis quóniam cum gentes essétis, ad simulácra muta prout ducebámini eúntes. Ideo notum vobis fácio, quod nemo in Spíritu Dei loquens, dicit anáthema Jesu. Et nemo potest dícere, Dóminus Jesus, nisi in Spíritu Sancto. Divisiónes vero gratiárum sunt, idem autem Spíritus. Et divisiónes ministratiónum sunt, idem autem Dóminus. Et divisiónes operatiónum sunt, idem vero Deus, qui operátur ómnia in ómnibus. Unicuíque autem datur manifestátio Spíritus ad utilitátem. Alii quidem per Spíritum datur sermo sapiéntiæ: álii autem sermo sciéntiæ secúndum eúmdem Spíritum: álteri fides in eódem Spíritu: álii grátia sanitátum in uno Spíritu: álii operátio virtútum, álii prophetía, álii discrétio spirítuum, álii génera linguárum, álii interpretátio sermónum. Hæc autem ómnia operátur unus atque idem Spíritus, dívidens síngulis prout vult.
[Brethren, you know that, when you were heathens, you went to dumb idols, according as you were led. Wherefore I give you to understand, that no man, speaking by the Spirit of God, saith Anathema to Jesus; and no man can say: The Lord Jesus, but by the Holy Ghost. Now there are diversities of graces, but the same Spirit; and there are diversities of ministries, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of operations, but the same God, who worketh all in all. And the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man unto profit. To one indeed, by the Spirit, is given the word of wisdom; and to another, the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit; to another the grace of healing in one Spirit; to another, the working of miracles; to another, prophecy; to another, the discerning of spirits; to another, divers kinds of tongues; to another, interpretation of speeches. But all these things one and the same Spirit worketh, dividing to every one according as He will.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 16. 8, 2
CUSTÓDI me, Dómine, ut pupíllam óculi: sub umbra alárum tuárum prótege me. V. De vultu tuo judícium meum pródeat: óculi tui vídeant æquitátem.
[Keep me, O Lord, as the apple of Thy eye: protect me under the shadow of Thy wings. V. Let my judgment come forth from Thy countenance: let Thy eyes behold the things that are equitable.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 64. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Te decet hymnus, Deus, in Sion: et tibi reddétur votum in Jerúsalem. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. A hymn, O God, becometh Thee in Sion: and a vow shall be paid to Thee in Jerusalem. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 18. 9-14
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus ad quosdam, qui in se confidebant tamquam justi, et aspernabántur céteros, parábolam istam: Duo hómines ascendérunt in templum ut orárent: unus Pharisæus et alter publicánus. Pharisæus stans, hæc apud se orábat: Deus, grátias ago tibi, quia non sum sicut céteri hóminum: raptóres, injústi, adúlteri: velut étiam hic publicánus. Jejúno bis in Sábbato: décimas do ómnium quæ possídeo. Et publicánus a longe stans nolébat nec óculos ad cælum leváre: sed percutiébat pectus suum, dicens: Deus, propítius esto mihi peccatóri. Dico vobis: descéndit hic justificátus in domum suam ab illo: quia omnis qui se exáltat, humiliábitur: et qui se humíliat, exaltábitur.
[At that time, Jesus spoke this parable to some who trusted in themselves as just, and despised others. Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican. The Pharisee standing, prayed thus with himself: O God, I give Thee thanks that I am not as the rest of men, extortioners, unjust, adulterers; as also is this publican. I fast twice in the week; I give tithes of all that I possess. And the Publican standing afar off would not so much as lift up his eyes towards heaven, but struck his breast saying: O God, be merciful to me a sinner. I say to you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other: because every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 24. 1-3
AD te, Dómine, levávi ánimam meam: Deus meus, in te confído, non erubéscam: neque irrídeant me inimíci mei: étenim univérsi, qui te exspéctant, non confundéntur.
[To Thee, O Lord, have I lifted up my soul: in Thee, O my God, I put my trust, let me not be ashamed: neither let my enemies laugh at me: for none of them that wait on Thee shall be confounded.]
SECRET
TIBI, Dómine, sacrifícia dicáta reddántur: quæ sic ad honórem nóminis tui deferénda tribuísti, ut eádem remédia fíeri nostra præstáres Per Dóminum.
[May these sacrifices, O Lord, which Thou hast appointed to be offered up to Thee for the glory of Thy name so be made holy, that they may become a remedy for all our ills. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 50. 21
ACCEPTÁBIS sacrificium justítiæ, oblatiónes et holocáusta, super altáre tuum, Dómine.
[Thou wilt accept the sacrifice of justice, oblations and holocausts, upon Thy altar, O Lord.]
POSTCOMMUNION
QUÆSUMUS, Dómine Deus noster: ut, quos divínis reparáre non désinis sacraméntis, tuis non destítuas benígnus auxíllis. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, we beseech Thee, O Lord our God, that Thy gracious help may never be lacking to us whose strength Thou ceasest not to renew with Thy divine sacraments. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Eleventh Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 67. 6-7, 36
DEUS in loco sancto suo: Deus qui inhabitáre facit unánimes in domo: ipse dabit virtútem, et fortitúdinem plebi suæ. Ps. 67. 2. Exsúrgat Deus, et dissipéntur inimíci ejus: et fúgiant, qui odérunt eum, a fácie ejus. V. Gloria Patri.
[God in His holy place; God who maketh men of one mind to dwell in a house: He shall give power and strength to His people. Ps. Let God arise, and let His enemies be scattered: and let them that hate Him flee from before His face. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
OMNIPOTENS sempitérne Deus, qui abundántía pietátis tuæ et mérita súpplicum excédis et vota: effúnde super nos misericórdiam tuam; ut dimíttas quæ consciéntia métuit, et adjícias quod orátio non præsúmit. Per Dóminum.
[Almighty and eternal God, Who in the abundance of Thy loving kindness art wont to give beyond the deserts and desires of those who humbly pray; pour down upon us Thy mercy, forgiving us these things of which our conscience is afraid, and granting us those blessings which we dare not presume to ask. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - I Corinthians 15. 1-10
FRATRES: Notum vobis fácio Evangélium, quod prædcávi vobis, quod et accepístis, in quo et statis, per quod et salvámini: qua ratióne prædicáverim vobis, si tenétis, nisi frustra credidístis. Trádidi enim vobis in primis, quod et accépi: quóniam Christus mórtuus est pro peccátis nostris secúndum Scriptúras: et quia sepúltus est, et quia resurréxit tértia die secúndum Scriptúras: et quia visus est Cephæ, et post hoc úndecim. Deínde visus est plus quam quingéntis frátribus simul, ex quibus multi manent usque adhuc, quidam autem dormiérunt. Deínde visus est Jacóbo, deínde Apóstolis ómnibus: novíssime autem ómnium tamquam abortívo, visus est et mihi. Ego enim sum mínimus Apostolórum, qui non sum dignus vocári Apóstolus, quóniam persecútus sum Ecclésiam Dei. Grátia autem Dei sum id quod sum, et grátia ejus in me vácua non fuit.
[Brethren: I make known unto you the gospel which I preached to you, which also you have received, and wherein you stand, by which also you are saved, if you hold fast after what manner I preached unto you, unless you have believed in vain. For I delivered unto you first of all, which I also received, how that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures; and that He was buried, and that He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures; and that He was seen by Cephas, and after that by the eleven. Then was He seen by more than five hundred brethren at once; of whom many remain until this present, and some are fallen asleep. After that He was seen by James then by all the apostles. And last of all He was seen also by me, as by one born out of due time. For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God; but by the grace of God I am what I am; and His grace in me hath not been void.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 27. 7, 1
IN Deo sperávit cor meum, et adjútus sum: et reflóruit caro mea, et ex voluntáte mea confitébor illi. V. Ad te, Dómine, clamávi: Deus meus, ne síleas: ne discédas a me.
[In God hath my heart confided, and I have been helped; and my flesh hath flourished again; and with my will I will give praise to Him. V. Unto Thee will I cry, O Lord: O my God, be not Thou silent; depart not from me.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 80. 2-3
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Exsultáte Deo adjutóri nostro, jubiláte Deo Jacob: súmite psalmum jucúndum cum cíthara. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Rejoice to God our helper; sing aloud to the God of Jacob; take a pleasant psalm with the harp. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Mark 7. 31-37
IN illo témpore: Exiens Jesus de fínibus Tyri, venit per Sidónem ad mare Galilææ, inter médios fines Decapóleos. Et addúcunt ei surdum et mutum, et deprecabúntur eum, ut impónat illi manum. Et apprehéndens eum de turba seórsum, misit dígitos suos in aurículas ejus: et éxspuens, tétigit linguam ejus: et suspíciens in cælum, ingémuit, et ait illi: Ephphetha, quod est adaperíre. Et statim apértæ sunt aures ejus, et solútum est vinculum linguæ ejus, et loquebántur recte. Et præcépit illis, ne cui dícerent. Quanto autem eis præcipiébat, tanto magis plus prædicábant: et eo ámplius admirabántur, dicéntes: Bene ómnia fecit: et surdos fecit audíre et mutos loqui.
[At that time, Jesus going out of the coasts of Tyre, came by Sidon to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis. And they bring to Him one deaf and dumb, and they besought Him that He would lay His hand upon him. And taking him from the multitude apart, He put His fingers into his ears, and spitting, He touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven, He groaned and said to him: Ephphetha, which is, Be thou opened: and immediately his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke right. And He charged them that they should tell no man: but the more He charged them so much the more a great deal did they publish it; and so much the more did they wonder, saying: He hath done all things well; He hath made both the deaf to hear and the dumb to speak.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 29. 2-3
EXALTÁBO te, Dómine, quóniam suscepísti me, nec delectásti inimícos meos super me: Dómine, clamávi ad te, et sanásti me.
[I will extol Thee, O Lord, for Thou hast upheld me; and hast not made my enemies to rejoice over me: O Lord, I have cried to Thee, and Thou hast healed me.]
SECRET
RÉSPICE, Dómine, quæsumus, nostram propítius servitútem: ut, quod offérimus, sit tibi munus accéptum, et sit nostræ fragilitátis subsídium. Per Dóminum.
[Look down in mercy upon our service, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that the gifts we offer may be acceptable unto Thee, and a support in our weakness. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Proverbs 3. 9, 10
HONÓRA Dóminum de tua substántia, et de primítiis frugum tuárum: et implebúntur hórrea tua saturitáte, et vino torculária redundábunt.
[Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first of all thy fruits: and thy barns shall be filled with abundance, and thy presses shall run over with wine.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SENTIÁMUS, quæsumus, Dómine, tui perceptióne sacraménti, subsídium mentis et córporis: ut in utróque salváti, cæléstis remédii plenitúdine gloriémur. Per Dóminum.
[Having received Thy holy sacrament, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that we may feel supported in soul and body; that being saved in both, we may glory in the fullness of the heavenly remedy. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Twelth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 69. 2-3
DEUS, in adjutórium meum inténde: Dómine, ad adjuvándum me festína: confundántur et revereántur inimíci mei, qui quærunt ánimam meam. Ps. 69. 4. Avertántur retrórsum, et erubéscant: qui cógitant mihi mala. V. Gloria Patri.
[Incline unto my aid, O God: O Lord, make haste to help me: let my enemies be confounded and ashamed, who seek my soul. Ps. Let them be turned backward and blush for shame, who desire evils to me. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
OMNÍPOTENS et miséricors Deus, de cujus múnere venit, ut tibi a fidélibus tuis digne et laudabíliter serviátur; tribue, quæsumus, nobis; ut ad promissiónes tuas sine offensióne currámus. Per Dóminum.
[Almighty and merciful God, of whose gift it cometh that Thy faithful people do unto Thee true and laudable service; grant, we beseech Thee, that we may run without hindrance toward the attainment of Thy promises. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - II Corinthians 3. 4-9
FRATRES: Fidúciam talem habémus per Christum ad Deum: non quod sufficiéntes simus cogitáre áliquid a nobis, quasi ex nobis: sed sufficiéntia nostra ex Deo est: qui et idóneos nos fecit minístros novi testaménti: non líttera, sed spíritu: líttera enim occídit, spíritus autem vivíficat. Quod si ministrátio mortis, lítteris deformáta in lapídibus, fuit in glória; ita ut non possent inténdere fílii Israël in fáciem Móysi, propter glóriam vultus ejus, quæ evacuátur: quómodo non magis ministrátio Spíritus erit in glória? Nam si ministrátio damnatiónis glória est: multo magis abúndat ministérium justítiæ in glória.
[Brethren: Such confidence we have through Christ towards God. Not that we are sufficient to think anything of ourselves, as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God. Who also hath made us fit ministers of the new testament, not in the letter, but in the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit quickeneth. Now if the ministration of death, engraven with letters upon stones, was glorious, so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which is made void: how shall not the ministration of the spirit be rather in glory? For if the ministration of condemnation be glory, much more the ministration of justice aboundeth in glory.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 33. 2-3
BENEDÍCAM Dóminum in omni témpore: semper laus ejus in ore meo. V. In Dómino laudábitur ánima mea: áudiant mansuéti, et læténtur.
[I will bless the Lord at all times; His praise shall ever be in my mouth. V. In the Lord shall my soul be praised: let the meek hear, and rejoice.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 87. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Dómine Deus salútis meæ; in die clamávi et nocte coram te. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. O Lord, the God of my salvation, I have cried in the day, and in the night before Thee. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 10. 23-37
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis: Beáti óculi qui vident quæ vos vidétis. Dico enim vobis, quod multi prophétæ et reges voluérunt vidére quæ vos vidétis, et non vidérunt: et audíre quæ audítis, et non audiérunt. Et ecce quidam legisperítus surréxit, tentans illum, et dicens: Magíster, quid faciéndo vitam ætérnam possidébo? At ille dixit ad eum: In lege quid scriptum est? quómodo legis? Ille respóndens, dixit: Díliges Dóminum Deum tuum ex toto corde tuo, et ex tota ánima tua, et ex ómnibus víribus tuis, et ex omni mente tua; et próximum tuum sicut teípsum. Dixítque illi: Recte respondísti: hoc fac, et vives. Ille autem volens justificáre seípsum, dixit ad Jesum: Et quis est meus próximus? Suscípiens autem Jesus, dixit: Homo quidam descendébat ab Jerúsalem in Jéricho, et íncidit in latrónes, qui étiam despoliavérunt eum: et plagis impósitis abiérunt, semivívo relícto. Accidit autem ut sacérdos quidam descénderet eádem via: et viso illo præterívit. Simíliter et levíta, cum esset secus locum et vidéret eum, pertránsiit. Samaritánus autem quidam iter fáciens, venit secus eum: et videns eum, misericórdia motus est. Et apprópians, alligávit vúlnera ejus, infúndens óleum et vinum: et impónens illum in juméntum suum, duxit in stábulum, et curam ejus egit. Et áltera die prótulit duos denários et dedit stabulário, et ait: Curam illíus habe: et quodcúmque supererogáveris, ego cum redíero, reddam tibi. Quis horum trium vidétur tibi próximus fuísse illi, qui íncidit in latrónes? At ille dixit: Qui fecit misericórdiam in illum. Et alt illi Jesus: Vade, et tu fac simíliter.
[At that time, Jesus said to His disciples: Blessed are the eyes that see the things which you see. For I say to you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see the things that you see, and have not seen them; and to hear the things that you hear, and have not heard them. And behold a certain lawyer stood up, tempting Him, and saying: Master, what must I do to possess eternal life? But He said to him: What is written in the law? how readest thou? He answering, said: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind; and thy neighbor as thyself. And He said to him: Thou hast answered rightly: this do, and thou shalt live. But he, willing to justify himself, said to Jesus: And who is my neighbor? And Jesus answering, said: A certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among robbers, who also stripped him, and having wounded him went away, leaving him half dead: and it chanced that a certain priest went down the same way, and seeing him, passed by. In like manner also a Levite, when he was near the place and saw him, passed by. But a certain Samaritan being on his journey, came near him, and seeing him, was moved with compassion, and going up to him, bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine; and setting him upon his own beast, brought him to an inn, and took care of him: and the next day he took out two pence, and gave to the host, and said: Take care of him, and whatsoever thou shalt spend over and above, I, at my return will repay thee. Which of these three, in thy opinion, was neighbor to him that fell among robbers? But he said: He that shewed mercy to him. And Jesus said to him: Go and do thou in like manner.]
OFFERTORY - Exodus 32. 11, 13, 14
PRECÁTUS est Móyses in conspéctu Dómini Dei sui, et dixit: Quare, Dómine, irásceris in pópulo tuo? Parce iræ ánimæ tuæ: meménto Abraham, Isaac et Jacob, quibus jurásti dare terram fluéntem lac et mel. Et placátus factus est Dóminus de malignitáte, quam dixit fácere pópulo suo.
[Moses prayed in the sight of the Lord his God, and said: Why, O Lord, is Thy indignation enkindled against Thy people? Let the anger of Thy mind cease; remember Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, to whom Thou didst swear to give a land flowing with milk and honey: and the Lord was appeased from doing the evil which He had spoken of doing against His people.]
SECRET
HÓSTIAS, quæsumus, Dómine, propítius inténde, quas sacris altáribus exhibémus: ut nobis indulgéntiam largiendo, tuo nómini dent honórem. Per Dóminum.
[Mercifully regard, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the sacrifices, which we lay upon Thine altar: that they may obtain pardon for our sins, and give glory to Thy name. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 103. 13, 14-15
DE fructu óperum tuórum, Dómine, satiábitur terra: ut edúcas panem de terra, et vinum lætíficet cor hóminis: ut exhílaret fáciem in óleo, et panis cor hóminis confírmet.
[The earth shall be filled with the fruit of Thy works, O Lord, that Thou mayest bring bread out of the earth, and that wine may cheer the heart of man: that he may make the face cheerful with oil; and that bread may strengthen man’s heart.]
POSTCOMMUNION
VIVÍFICET nos, quæsumus, Dómine, hujus participátio sancta mystérii: et páriter nobis expiatiónem tríbuat et munímen. Per Dóminum.
[May we be quickened, O Lord, by participation in this holy mystery, and may it grant us both the expiation of our sins and the strengthening of our souls. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Thirteenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 73. 20, 19, 23
RESPICE, Dómine, in testaméntum tuum et ánimas páuperum tuórum ne derelínquas in finem: exsúrge, Dómine, et júdica causam tuam, et ne obliviscáris voces quæréntium te. Ps. 73. 1. Ut quid, Deus, repulísti in finem: irátus est furor tuus super oves páscuæ tuæ? V. Gloria Patri.
[Have regard, O Lord, to Thy covenant, and forsake not to the end the souls of Thy poor: arise, O Lord, and judge Thy cause, and forget not the voices of them that seek Thee. Ps. O God, why hast Thou cast us off unto the end: why is Thy wrath enkindled against the sheep of Thy pasture V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
OMNÍPOTENS sempitérne Deus, da nobis fídei, spei, et caritátis augméntum: et, ut mereámur ássequi quod promíttis, fac nos amáre quod præcipis. Per Dóminum.
[Almighty and everlasting God, grant unto us an increase of faith, hope and charity: and that we may obtain what Thou dost promise, make us love that which Thou dost command. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Galatians 3. 16-22
FRATRES: Abrahæ dictæ sunt promissiónes et sémini ejus. Non dicit: Et semínibus, quasi in multis; sed quasi in uno: Et sémini tuo, qui est Christus. Hoc autem dico: testaméntum confirmátum a Deo, quæ post quadringéntos et trigínta annos facta est lex, non irrítum facit ad evacuándam promissiónem. Nam si ex lege heréditas, jam non ex promissiónes. Abrahæ autem per repromissiónem donávit Deus. Quid ígitur lex? Propter transgressiónes pósita est donec veníret semen, cui promíserat, ordináta per Angelos in manu mediatóris. Mediátor autem uníus non est: Deus autem unus est. Lex ergo advérsus promíssa Dei? Absit. Si enim data esset lex, quæ posset vivificáre, vere ex lege esset justítia. Sed conclúsit Scriptúra ómnia sub peccáto, ut promíssio ex fide Jesu Christi darétur credéntibus.
[Brethren: To Abraham were the promises made, and to his seed. He saith not: And to his seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. Now this I say, that the testament which was confirmed by God, the law which was made after four hundred and thirty years, doth not disannul, to make the promise of no effect. For if the inheritance be of the law, it is no more of promise. But God gave it to Abraham by promise. Why then was the law? It was set because of transgressions, until the seed should come, to whom He made the promise; being ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. Now a mediator is not of one: but God is one. Was the law then against the promises of God? God forbid. For if there had been a law given, which could give life, verily justice should have been by the law. But the Scripture hath concluded all under sin, that the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 73. 20, 19, 22
RÉSPICE, Dómine, in testaméntum tuum: et ánimas páuperum tuórum ne obliviscáris in finem. V. Exsúrge, Dómine, et júdica causam tuam: memor esto oppróbrii servórum tuórum.
[Have regard, O Lord, to Thy covenant, and forsake not to the end the souls of Thy poor. V. Arise, O Lord, and judge Thy cause: remember the reproach of Thy servants.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 89. 1
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Dómine, refúgium factus es nobis a generatióne et progénie. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Lord, thou hast been our refuge, from generation to generation. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 17. 11-19
IN illo témpore: Dum iret Jesus in Jerúsalem, transíbat per médiam Samaríam et Galilæam. Et cum ingrederétur quoddam castéllum, occurrérunt ei decem viri leprósi qui stetérunt a longe: et levavérunt vocem, dicéntes: Jesu præcéptor, miserére nostri. Quos ut vidit, dixit: Ite, osténdite vos sacerdótibus. Et factum est, dum irent, mundáti sunt. Unus autem ex illis, ut vidit quia mundátus est, regréssus est, cum magna voce magníficans Deum, et cécidit in fáciem ante pedes ejus, grátias agens: et hic erat Samaritánus. Respóndens autem Jesus, dixit: Nonne decem mundáti sunt? et novem ubi sunt? Non est invéntus qui redíret et daret glóriam Deo, nisi hic alienígena. Et ait illi: Surge, vade; quia fides tua te salvum fecit.
[At that time, as Jesus was going to Jerusalem, he passed through the midst of Samaria and Galilee: and as He entered into a certain town, there met him ten men that were lepers, who stood afar off, and lifted up their voice, saying: Jesus, master, have mercy on us. Whom when He saw, He said: Go, show yourselves to the priests. And it came to pass, as they went, they were made clean. And one of them, when he saw that he was made clean, went back, with a loud voice glorifying God: and he fell on his face before His feet, giving thanks: and this was a Samaritan. And Jesus answering said: Were not ten made clean? And where are the nine? There is no one found to return, and give glory to God, but this stranger. And He said to him: Arise, go thy way; for thy faith hath made thee whole.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 30. 15, 16
IN te sperávi, Dómine; dixi: Tu es Deus meus, in mánibus tuis témpora mea.
[In Thee, O Lord, have I hoped; I said: Thou art my God, my times are in Thy hands.]
SECRET
PROPITIÁRE, Dómine, pópulo tuo, propitiáre munéribus: ut hac oblatióne placátus, et indulgéntiam nobis tríbuas, et postuláta concédas. Per Dóminum.
[Look with favor, O Lord, upon Thy people; look with favor upon their offerings: and appeased by this oblation, mercifully forgive us our sins and grant what we ask. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Wisdom 16. 20
PANEM de cælo dedísti nobis, Dómine, habéntem omne delectaméntum, et omnem sapórem suavitátis.
[Thou hast given us, O Lord, bread from heaven, having in it all that is delicious, and the sweetness of every taste.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SUMPTIS, Dómine, cæléstibus sacraméntis: ad redemptiónis ætérnæ, quæsumus, proficiámus augméntum. Per Dóminum.
[Having received Thy heavenly sacrament, we beseech Thee, O Lord, to increase thereby our hope of everlasting salvation. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Fourteenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 83. 10-11
PROTECTOR noster, áspice, Deus, et réspice in fáciem Christi tui: quia mélior est dies una in átriis tuis super mílla. Ps. 83. 2-3. Quam dilécta tabernácula tua, Dómine virtútum! concupíscit et déficit ánima mea in átria Dómine. V. Gloria Patri.
[Behold, O God, our protector, and look on the face of Thy Christ: for better is one day in Thy courts above thousands. Ps. How lovely are Thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! my soul longeth and fainteth for the courts of the Lord. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
CUSTÓDI, Dómine, quæsumus, Ecclésiam tuam propitiatióne perpátua: et quia sine te lábitur humána mortálitas; tuis semper auxíliis et abstrahátur a nóxiis, et ad salutária dirigátur. Per Dóminum.
[Keep, we beseech Thee, O Lord, Thy Church with perpetual peace; and because the frailty of man without Thee cannot but fall, keep us ever by Thy help from all things hurtful, and lead us to all things profitable to our salvation. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Galatians 5. 16-24
FRATRES: Spíritu ambuláte, et desidéria carnis non perficiétis. Caro enim concupíscit advérsus spíritum, spíritus autem adversus carnem: hæc enim sibi ínvicem adversántur, ut non quæcúmque vultis, illa faciátis. Quod si spíritu ducímini, non estis sub lege. Manifésta sunt autem ópera carnis, quae sunt fornicátio, immundítia, impudicítia, luxúria, idolórum sérvitus, venefícia, inimicítiae, contentiónes, æmulatiónes, iræ, rixæ, dissensiónes, sectæ, invidiæ, homicídia, ebrietátes, comessatiónes, et his similia: quae prædíco vobis, sicut prædíxi: quóniam, qui tália agunt, regnum Dei non consequéntur. Fructus autem Spíritus est: cáritas, gáudium, pax, patiéntia, benígnitas, bónitas, longanímitas, mansuetúdo, fides, modéstia, continéntia, cástitas. Advérsus hujúsmodi non est lex. Qui autem sunt Christi, carnem suam crucifixérunt cum vítiis et concupiscéntis.
[Brethren: Walk in the spirit, and you shall not fulfil the lusts of the flesh: for the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh; for these are contrary one to another, so that you do not the things that you would. But if you are led by the spirit, you are not under the law. Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are fornication, uncleanness, immodesty, luxury, idolatry, witchcrafts, enmities, contentions, emulations, wraths, quarrels, dissensions, sects, envies, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of the which I foretell you, as I have foretold to you, that they who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God. But the fruit of the spirit is: charity, joy, peace, patience, benignity, goodness, longanimity, mildness, faith, modesty, continency, chastity. Against such there is no law. And they that are Christ’s have crucified their flesh with the vices and concupiscences.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 117. 8-9
BONUM est confídere in Dómino, quam confídere in hómine. V. Bonum est speráre in Dómino, quam speráre in princípibus.
[It is good to confide in the Lord, rather than to have confidence in man. V. It is good to trust in the Lord, rather than to trust in princes.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 94. 1
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Veníte, exsultémus Dómino, jubilémus Deo salutári nostro. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Come, let us praise the Lord with joy; let us joyfully sing to God our Savior. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 6. 24-33
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis: Nemo potest duóbus dóminis servíre: aut enim unum ódio habébit, et álterum díliget: aut unum sustinébit, et álterum contémnet. Non potéstis Deo servíre et mammónæ. Ideo dico vobis, ne sollíciti sitis ánimæ vestræ quid manducé tis, neque córpori vestro quid induámini. Nonne ánima plus est quam esca: et corpus plus quam vestiméntum? Respícite volatília cæli, quóniam non serunt neque metunt neque cóngregant in hórrea: et Pater vester cæléstis pascit illa. Nonne vos magis pluris estis illis? Quis autem vestrum cógitans potest adjícere ad statúram suam cúbitum unum? Et de vestiménto quid sollíciti estis? Consideráte lília agri quómodo crescunt: non labórant neque nent. Dico autem vobis, quóniam nec Sálomon in omni glória sua coopértus est sicut unum ex istis. Si autem fœnum agri, quod hódie est et cras in clíbanum míttitur, Deus sic vestit: quanto magis vos módicæ fídei? Nolíte ergo sollíciti esse, dicéntes: Quid manducábimus aut quid bibémus aut quo operiémur? Hæc enim ómnia gentes inquírunt. Scit enim Pater vester, quia his ómnibus indigétis. Quærite ergo primum regnum Dei et justítiam ejus: et hæc ómnia adjiciéntur vobis.
[At that time Jesus said to His disciples: No man can serve two masters; for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will sustain the one and despise the other. You cannot serve God and mammon. Therefore I say to you, be not solicitous for your life, what you shall eat, nor for your body, what you shall put on. Is not the life more than the meat, and the body more than the raiment? Behold the birds of the air; for they neither sow nor do they reap, nor gather into barns, and your heavenly Father feedeth them. Are you not of much more value than they? And which of you, by taking thought, can add to his stature one cubit? And for raiment why are you solicitous? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they labor not, neither do they spin; but I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these. Now if God so clothe the grass of the field, which is today, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more you, O ye of little faith! Be not solicitous therefore saying, what shall we eat, or what shall we drink, or wherewith shall we be clothed, for after all these things do the heathens seek. For your Father knoweth that you have need of all these things. Seek ye therefore first the Kingdom of God, and His justice; and all these things shall be added unto you.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 33. 8-9
TUIIMMÍTTET Angelus Dómini in circúitu timéntium eum, et erípiet eos: gustáte et vidéte, quóniam suávis est Dóminus.
[The angel of the Lord shall encamp round about them that fear Him, and shall deliver them: O taste and see that the Lord is sweet!]
SECRET
CONCÉDE nobis, Dómine, quæsumus, ut hæc hóstia salutáris et nostrórum fiat purgátio delictórum, et tuæ propitiátio potestátis. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, we beseech Thee, O Lord, that the saving oblation we offer, may both atone for our sins, and propitiate for us Thine almighty power. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Matthew 6. 33
PRIMUM quærite regnum Dei, et ómnia adjiciéntur vobis, dicit Dóminus.
[Seek first the Kingdom of God: and all things shall be added unto you, saith the Lord.]
POSTCOMMUNION
PURÍFICENT semper et múniant tua sacramenta nos, Deus: et ad perpétuæ ducant salvatiónis efféctum. Per Dóminum.
[May Thy Sacraments, O God, at all times purify and strengthen us, and through them may we attain to eternal salvation. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Fifteenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 85. 1, 2-3
INCLINA, Dómine, aurem tuam ad me, et exáudi me: salvum, fac servum tuum, Deus meus, sperántem in te: miserére mihi, Dómine, quóniam ad te clamávi tota die. Ps. 85. 4. Lætífica ánimam servi tui: quia ad te, Dómine, ánimam meam levávi. V. Gloria Patri.
[Incline Thine ear, O Lord, to me and hear me: save Thy servant, O my God, that trusteth in Thee: have mercy on me, O Lord, for I have cried to Thee all day. Ps. Give joy to the soul of Thy servant; for to Thee, O Lord, I have lifted up my soul. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
ECCLÉSIAM tuam, Dómine, miserátio continuáta mundet et múniat: et quia sine te non potest salva consístere; tuo semper múnere gubernétur. Per Dóminum.
[Let Thy continual pity cleanse and defend Thy Church, we beseech Thee, O Lord; and because it cannot continue in safety without Thee, govern it evermore by Thy help. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Galatians 5. 25-26; 6. 1-10
FRATRES: Si spíritu vívimus, spíritu et ambulémus. Non efficiámur inánis glóriæ cúpidi, ínvicem provocántes, ínvicem invidéntes. Fratres, et si præoccupátus fúerit homo in áliquo delícto, vos, qui spirituáles estis, hujúsmodi instrúite in spiritu lenitátis, consíderans teípsum, ne et tu tentéris. Alter altérius ónera portáte, et sic adimplébitis legem Christi. Nam si quis exístimat se áliquid esse cum nihil sit, ipse se sedúcit. Opus autem suum probet unusquísque, et sic in semetípso tantum glóriam habébit, et non in áltero. Unusquísque enim onus suum portábit. Commúnicet autem is, qui catechizátur verbo, ei, qui se catechízatur, in ómnibus bonis. Nolíte erráre: Deus non irridétur. Quæ enim semináverit homo, haec et metet. Quóniam qui séminat in carne sua, de carne et metet corruptiónem: qui autem séminat in spíritu, de spíritu metet vitam ætérnam. Bonum autem faciéntes, non deficiámus: témpore enim suo metémus, non deficiéntes. Ergo dum tempus habémus, operémur bonum ad omnes, máxime autem ad domésticos fídei.
[Brethren: If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit. Let us not be made desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one another. Brethren, and if a man be overtaken in any fault, you, who are spiritual, instruct such a one in the spirit of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another’s burdens, and so you shall fulfil the law of Christ. For if any man think himself to be something, whereas he is nothing, he deceiveth himself. But let everyone prove his own work, and so he shall have glory in himself only, and not in another. For every one shall bear his own burden. And let him that is instructed in the word, communicate to him that instructeth him, in all good things. Be not deceived: God is not mocked; for what things a man shall sow, those also shall he reap. For he that soweth in his flesh, of the flesh also shall reap corruption: but he that soweth in the spirit, of the spirit shall reap life everlasting. And in doing good, let us not fail; for in due time we shall reap, not failing. Therefore, whilst we have time, let us work good to all men, but especially to those who are of the household of the faith.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 91. 2-3
BONUM est confitéri Domino: et psállere nómini tuo, Altíssime. V. Ad annuntiándum mane misericórdiam tuam, et veritátem tuam per noctem.
[It is good to give praise to the Lord; and to sing to Thy name, O Most High. V. To show forth Thy mercy in the morning, and Thy truth in the night.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 94. 3
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Quóniam Deus magnus Dóminus, et Rex magnus super omnem terram. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. For the Lord is a great God, and a great King over all the earth. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 7. 11-16
IN illo témpore: Ibat Jesus in civitátem quæ vocátur Naïm: et ibant cum eo discípuli ejus et turba copiósa. Cum autem appropinquáret portæ civitátis, ecce defúnctus efferebátur fílius únicus matris suæ: et hæc vídua erat: et turba civitátis multa cum illa. Quam cum vidísset Dóminus, misericórdia motus super eam, dixit illi: Noli flere. Et accéssit et tétigit lóculum. (Hi autem qui portábant stetérunt.) Et ait: Adoléscens, tibi dico, surge. Et resédit qui erat mórtuus, et cœpit loqui. Et dedit illum matri suæ. Accépit autem omnes timor: et magnificábant Deum, dicéntes: Quia prophéta magnus surréxit in nobis: et quia Deus visitávit plebem suam.
[At that time, Jesus went into a city called Naim; and there went with Him His disciples, and a great multitude. And when He came nigh to the city, behold a dead man was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow, and a great multitude of the city were with her. And when the Lord saw her, He had compassion on her, and said to her: Weep not. And He came near and touched the bier. And they that carried it stood still. And He said: Young man, I say to thee, Arise: and he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And He delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on them all: and they glorified God, saying: A great prophet is risen up amongst us, and God hath visited His people.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 39. 2, 3, 4
EXSPÉCTANS exspectávi Dóminum, et respéxit me: et exaudívit deprecatiónem meam: et immísit in os meum cánticum novum, hymnum Deo nostro.
[With expectation I have waited for the Lord, and He had regard to me; and he heard my prayer, and He put a new canticle into my mouth, a song to our God.]
SECRET
TUA nos, Dómine, sacraménta custódiant: et contra diabólicos semper tueántur incúrsus. Per Dóminum.
[May Thy Sacraments, O Lord, be our safeguard, and ever defend us against the attacks of the evil one. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - John 6. 52
PANIS quem ego dédero, caro mea est pro sæculi vita.
[The Bread that I will give is My flesh for the life of the world.]
POSTCOMMUNION
MENTES nostras et córpora possídeat, quæsumus, Dómine, doni cæléstis operátio: ut non noster sensus in nobis, sed júgiter ejus prævéniat efféctus. Per Dóminum.
[In soul and in body, O Lord, may we be ruled by the operation of this heavenly gift; that the graces flowing therefrom, and not the impulses of nature, may inspire all our actions. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Sixteenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 85. 3, 5
MISERERE mihi, Dómine, quóniam ad te clamávi tota die: quia tu, Dómine, suávis ac mitis es, et copiósus in misericórdia ómnibus invocántibus te. Ps. 85. 1. Inclína, Dómine, aurem tuam mihi, et exáudi me: quóniam inops et pauper sum ego. V. Gloria Patri.
[Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I have cried to Thee all the day; for Thou, O Lord, art sweet and mild and plenteous in mercy to all that call upon Thee. Ps. Incline Thy ear to me, O Lord, and hear me; for I am needy and poor. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
TUA nos, quæsumus, Dómine, grátia semper et prævéniat et sequátur: ac bonis opéribus júgiter præstet esse inténtos. Per Dóminum.
[O Lord, we pray Thee that Thy grace may always precede and follow us, and make us continually intent upon all good works. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Ephesians 3. 13-21
FRATRES: Obsecro vos, ne deficiátis in tribulatiónibus meis pro vobis: quæ est glória vestra. Hujus rei grátia flecto génua mea ad Patrem Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, ex quo omnis patérnitas in cælis et in terra nominátur, ut det vobis secúndum divítias glóriæ suæ, virtúte corroborári per Spíritum ejus in interiórem hóminem, Christum habitáre per fidem in córdibus vestris: in caritáte radicáti et fundáti, ut possítis comprehéndere cum ómnibus sanctis, quæ sit latitúdo, et longitúdo, et sublímitas et profúndum: scire étiam supereminéntem sciéntiæ caritátem Christi, ut impleámini in omnem plenitúdinem Dei. Ei autem, qui potens est ómnia fácere superabundánter quam pétimus, aut intellígimus, secúndum virtútem quæ operátur in nobis: ipsi glória in Ecclésia et in Christo Jesu, in omnes generatiónes sæculi saeculórum. Amen.
[Brethren: I pray you not to faint at my tribulations for you, which are your glory. For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom all paternity in heaven and earth is named, that He would grant you, according to the riches of His glory, to be strengthened by His Spirit with might unto the inward man. That Christ may dwell by faith in your hearts; that being rooted and founded in charity, you may be able to comprehend with all the saints, what is the breadth and length, and height, and depth. To know also the charity of Christ, which surpasseth all knowledge; that you may be filled unto all the fullness of God. Now to Him who is able to do all things more abundantly than we desire or understand, according to the power that worketh in us: to Him be glory in the Church, and in Christ Jesus, unto all generations, world without end. Amen.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 101. 16-17
TIMÉBUNT gentes nomen tuum, Dómine, et omnes reges terræ glóriam tuam. V. Quóniam ædificávit Dóminus Sion, et vidébitur in majestáte sua.
[The Gentiles shall fear Thy name, O Lord, and all the kings of the earth Thy glory. V. For the Lord hath built up Sion, and He shall be seen in His majesty.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 97. 1
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Cántate Dómino cánticum novum: quia mirabília fecit Dóminus. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Sing ye to the Lord a new canticle, because the Lord hath done wonderful things. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Luke 14. 1-11
IN illo témpore: Cum intráret Jesus in domum cujúsdam príncipis pharisæórum sábbato manducáre panem, et ipsi observábant eum. Et ecce homo quidam hydrópicus erat ante illum. Et respóndens Jesus, dixit ad legisperítos et pharisæos, dicens: Si licet sábbato curáre? At illi tacuérunt. Ipse vero apprehénsum sanávit eum, ac dimísit. Et respóndens ad illos, dixit: Cujus vestrum ásinus aut bos in púteum cadet, et non contínuo éxtrahet illum die sábbati? Et non póterant ad hæc respondére illi. Dicébat autem et ad invitátos parábolam, inténdens quómodo primos accúbitus elígerent, dicens ad illos: Cum invitátus fúeris ad núptias, non discúmbas in primo loco, ne forte honorátior te sit invitátus ab illo, et véniens is, qui te, et illum vocávit, dicat tibi: Da huic locum: et tunc incípias cum rubóre novíssimum locum tenere. Sed cum vocátus fúeris, vade, recúmbe in novíssimo loco: ut, cum vénerit qui te invitávit, dicat tibi: Amíce, ascénde supérius. Tunc erit tibi glória coram simul discumbéntibus: quia omnis, qui se exáltat, humiliábitur: et qui se humíliat, exaltábitur.
[At that time, when Jesus went into the house of one of the chief of the Pharisees on the Sabbath day to eat bread, they watched Him. And behold, there was a certain man before Him that had dropsy: and Jesus answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying: Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? But they held their peace: but He taking him, healed him, and sent him away. And answering them, He said: Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fall into a pit, and will not immediately draw him out on the Sabbath day? And they could not answer Him these things. And He spoke a parable also to them that were invited, marking how they chose the first seats at the table, saying to them: When thou art invited to a wedding, sit not down in the first place, lest perhaps one more honorable than thou be invited by him; and he that invited thee and him, come and say to thee: Give this man place; and then, thou begin with shame to take the lowest place. But when thou art invited, go, sit down in the lowest place: that when he who invited thee cometh, he may say to thee: Friend, go up higher: then shalt thou have glory before them that sit at table with thee: because every one that exalteth himself shall be humbled, and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 39. 14-15
DÓMINE, in auxílium meum réspice: confundántur et revereántur qui quærunt ánimam meam, ut áuferant eam: Dómine, in auxílium meum réspice.
[Look down, O Lord, to help me; let them be confounded and ashamed that seek after my soul to take it away; look down, O Lord, to help me.]
SECRET
MUNDA nos, quæsumus, Domine, sacrifícii præséntis efféctu: et pérfice miserátus in nobis: ut ejus mereámur esse partícipes. Per Dominum.
[Cleanse our hearts, we beseech Thee, O Lord, through the effects of this sacrifice: and in Thy mercy make us worthy to partake thereof. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 70. 16-17, 18
DÓMINE, memorábor justítiæ tuæ solíus: Deus, docuísti me a juventúte mea: et usque in senéctam et sénium, Deus, ne derelínquas me.
[O Lord, I will be mindful of Thy justice alone: Thou hast taught me, O God, from my youth, and unto old age and grey hairs, O God, forsake me not.]
POSTCOMMUNION
PURÍFICA, quæsumus, Dómine, mentes nostras benígnus, et rénova cæléstibus sacraméntis: ut consequénter et córporum præsens páriter, et futúrum capiámus auxílium. Per Dóminum.
[In Thy loving kindness, O Lord, purify our souls, we beseech Thee, and renew them by this heavenly sacrament, that in both the present and future, even our bodies therein may find relief. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Seventeenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 118.137,124
JUSTUS es, Dómine, et rectum judícium tuum: fac cum servo tuo secúndum misericórdiam tuam. Ps. 118. 1. Beáti immaculáti in via: qui ámbulant in lege Dómini. V. Gloria Patri.
[Thou art just, O Lord, and Thy judgment is right; deal with Thy servant according to Thy mercy. Ps. Blessed are the undefiled in the way: who walk in the law of the Lord. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DA, quæsumus, Dómine, pópulo tuo diabólica vitáre contágia: et te solum Deum pura mente sectári. Per Dóminum.
[Grant, O Lord, unto Thy people grace to avoid all contact with the devil, and with pure minds to follow Thee, the only God. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Ephesians 4. 1-6
FRATRES: Obsecro vos ego vinctus in Dómino, ut digne ambulétis vocatióne, qua vocáti estis, cum omni humilitate et mansuetúdine, cum patiéntia, supportántes ínvicem in caritáte, sollíciti serváre unitátem spíritus in vínculo pacis. Unum corpus et unus spíritus, sicut vocáti estis in una spe vocatiónis vestræ. Unus Dóminus, una fides, unum baptísma. Unus Deus et Pater ómnium, qui est super omnes, et per ómnia, et in ómnibus nobis. Qui est benedíctus in sæcula saeculorum. Amen.
[Brethren: I, a prisoner of the Lord, beseech you that you walk worthy of the vocation in which you are called. With all humility and mildness, with patience, supporting one another in charity, careful to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. One body and one spirit, as you are called in one hope of your calling. One Lord, one faith, one baptism. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in us all, who is blessed for ever and ever. Amen.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 32. 12, 6
BEÁTA gens, cujus est Dóminus Deus eórum: pópulus, quem elégit Dóminus in hereditátem sibi. V. Verbo Dómini cæli firmáti sunt: et spíritu oris ejus omnis virtus eórum.
[Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord: the people whom He hath chosen for His inheritance. V. By the word of the Lord the heavens were established; and all the power of them by the spirit of His mouth.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 101. 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Dómine, exáudi oratiónem meam, et clamor meus ad te pervéniat. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. O Lord, hear my prayer; and let my cry come to Thee. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 22. 34-46
IN illo témpore: Accessérunt ad Jesum pharisæi: et interrogávit eum unus ex eis legis doctor, tentans eum: Magíster, quod est mandátum magnum in lege? Ait illi Jesus: Díliges Dóminum Deum tuum, ex toto corde tuo, et in tota ánima tua, et in tota mente tua. Hoc est máximum et primum mandátum. Secúndum autem símile est huic: Díliges próximum tuum, sicut teípsum. In his duóbus mandátis univérsa lex pendet et prophétæ. Congregátis autem pharisæis, interrogávit eos Jesus, dicens: Quid vobis vidétur de Christo? cujus fílius est? Dicunt ei: David. Ait illis: Quómodo ergo David in spíritu vocat eum Dóminum, dicens: Dixit Dóminus Domino meo: sede a dextris meis, donec ponam inimícos tuos scabéllum pedum tuórum? Si ergo David vocat eum Dóminum, quómodo fílius ejus est? Et nemo póterat ei respondére verbum: neque ausus fuit quisquam ex illa die eum ámplius interrogáre.
[At that time the Pharisees came to Jesus, and one of them, a doctor of the law, asked Him, tempting Him: Master, which is the great commandment of the law? Jesus said to him: Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul and with thy whole mind. This is the greatest and the first commandment. And the second is like to this: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself. On these two commandments dependeth the whole law and the prophets. And the Pharisees being gathered together, Jesus asked them, saying: What think you of Christ, whose son is He? They say to Him: David’s. He saith to them: How then doth David, in spirit, call Him Lord, saying: The Lord said to my Lord: Sit on my right hand until I make Thy enemies Thy footstool? If David then call Him Lord, how is He his son? And no man was able to answer Him a word; neither durst any man, from that day forth, ask Him any more questions.]
OFFERTORY - Daniel 9. 4, 17, 18, 19
ORÁVI Deum meum ego Dániel, dicens: Exáudi, Dómine, preces servi tui: illúmina fáciem tuam super sanctuárium tuum: et propítius inténde pópulum istum, super quem invocátum est nomen tuum, Deus.
[I, Daniel, prayed to my God, saying: Hear, O Lord, the prayers of Thy servant; show Thy face upon Thy sanctuary, and favorably look down upon this people upon whom Thy name is invoked, O God.]
SECRET
MAJESTÁTEM tuam, Dómine, supplíciter deprecámur: ut hæc sancta, quæ gérimus, et a prætéritis nos delíctis éxuant et futúris. Per Dominum.
[We humbly implore Thy majesty, O Lord, that the holy mysteries we are celebrating, may free us both from past sins and future transgressions. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 75. 12, 13
VOVÉTE, et réddite Dómino Deo vestro omnes, qui in circúitu ejus affértis múnera: terríbili et ei qui aufert spíritum príncipum: terríbili apud omnes reges terræ.
[Vow ye, and pray to the Lord your God, all you that round about Him bring presents: to Him that is terrible, even to Him who taketh away the spirit of princes; to the terrible with all the kings of the earth.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SANCTIFICATIÓNIBUS tuis, omnípotens Deus, et vítia nostra curéntur, et remédia nobis ætérna provéniant. Per Dominum nostrum.
[By the grace of Thy sacraments, almighty God, may our passions be subdued and our eternal salvation assured. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Eighteenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Eccles 36.18
DA pacem, Dómine, sustinéntibus te, ut prophétæ tui fideles inveniéntur exáudi preces servi tui et plebis tuæ Israël. Ps. 121: 1. Lætátus sum in his, quæ dicta sunt mihi: in domum Dómini ibimus. V. Gloria Patri.
[Give peace, O Lord, to them that patiently wait for Thee, that Thy prophets may be found faithful: hear the prayers of Thy servant, and of Thy people Israel. Ps. I rejoiced at the things that were said to me: we shall go into the house of the Lord. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DÍRIGAT corda nostra, quæsumus Dómine, tuæ miseratiónis operátio: quia tibi sine te placére non póssumus. Per Dóminum.
[Let the exercise of Thy compassion, we beseech Thee, O Lord, direct out hearts: for without Thee we are not able to please Thee. Through the same Lord.]
EPISTLE - Corinthians 1: 4-8
FRATRES, Grátias ago Deo meo semper pro vobis in grátia Dei, quæ data est vobis in Christo Jesu: quod in ómnibus dívites facti estis in illo, in omni verbo, et in omni sciéntia: sicut testimónium Christi confirmátum est in vobis: ita ut nihil vobis desit in ulla grátia, exspectántibus revelatiónem Dómini nostri Jesu Christi, qui et confirmábit vos usque in finem sine crímine, in die advéntus Dómini nostri Jesu Christi.
[Brethren, I give thanks to my God always for you, for the grace of God that is given you in Jesus Christ, that in all things you are made rich in Him in all utterance and in all knowledge, as the testimony of Christ was confirmed to you so that nothing is wanting to you in my grace, waiting for the manifestation of our Lord Jesus Christ, Who will also confirm you into the end without crime, in the day of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.]
GRADUAL - Ps 121. 1,7
LÆTÁTUS sum in his, quæ dicta sunt mihi: in domum Dómini ibimus. V. Fiat pax in virtúte tua et abundántia in túrrìbus tuis.
[I rejoiced at the things that were said to me: We shall go into the house of the Lord. V. Let peace be in thy strength, and abundance in the towers.]
ALLELUIA - Ps. 101: 16
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Timébunt gentes nomen tuum, Dómine: et omnes reges terræ glórìam tuam. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. The Gentiles shall fear Thy Name, O Lord: and all the kings of the earth Thy glory. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 9. 1,8
IN illo témpore: Ascéndens Jesus in navículam, transfretávit, et venit in civitátem suam. Et ecce offerébant ei paralýticum jacéntem in lecto. Et videns Jesus fidem illorum, dixit paralýtico: Confíde, fili, remittúntur tibi peccáta tua. Et ecce quidam de scribis dixérunt intra se: Hic blasphémat. Et cum vidísset Jesus cogitatiónes eórum, dixit: Ut quid cogitátis mala in córdibus vestris? Quid est facílius, dícere: Dimittúntur tibi peccáta tua: an dícere: Surge, et ámbula? Ut autem sciátis, quia Fílius hóminis habet potestátem in terra dimitténdi peccáta, tunc ait paralýtico: Surge, tolle lectum tuum, et vade in domum tuam. Et surréxit et ábiit in domum suam. Vidéntes autem turbæ timuérunt et glorificavérunt Deum, qui dedit potestátem talem homínibus.
[At that time, Jesus entering into a boat, passed over the water and came into His own city. And behold they brought Him one sick of the palsy lying in a bed: and Jesus seeing their faith, said to the man sick of the palsy: Be of good heart, son, thy sins are forgiven thee. And behold some of the scribes said within themselves: He blasphemeth. And Jesus seeing their thoughts said: Why do you think evil in your hearts? whether is it easier to say: Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say: Arise and walk? But that you may know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins (then said He to the man sick of the palsy): Arise, take up thy bed, and go into thy house. And he arose, and went into his house. And the multitude seeing it, feared, and glorified God who had given such power to men.]
OFFERTORY - Ex. 24. 4, 5
SANCTIFICÁVIT Móyses altáre Dómino, ófferens super illud holocáusta, et ímmolans víctimas: fecit sacrifícium vespertínum in odórem suavitátis Dómino Deo, in conspéctu fíliórum Israël.
[Moses consecrated an altar to the Lord, offering upon it holocausts, and sacrificing victims: he made an evening sacrifice to the Lord God for an odor of sweetness, in the sight of the children of Israel.]
SECRET
DEUS, qui nos, per hujus sacrifícii veneránda commércia, uníus summæ divinitátis partícipes éfficis: præsta, quæsumus: ut, sicut tuam cognóscimus veritátem, sic eam dig nis móribus assequámur. Per Dóminum.
[O God who, through the venerable intercourse of this sacrifice dost make us partakers of the one supreme Godhead: grant, we beseech Thee, that having come to the knowledge of Thy truth, we may obtain it by worthy lives. Through the same Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 95, 8-9
TÓLLITE hóstias, et introíte in átria ejus: adoráte Dóminum in aula sancta ejus.
[BRING up sacrifices, and come into His courts: adore ye the Lord in His holy court.]
POSTCOMMUNION
GRÁTIAS tibi reférimus, Dómine, sacro múnere vegetáti, tuam misericórdiam deprecántes: ut dignos nos ejus participatióne perfícias. Per Dominum.
[We who are fed with Thy holy Gift, O Lord, do offer our thanks unto Thee: beseeching Thy mercy that Thou mayest make us worthy to share in it. Through the same Lord Jesus Christ.]
Ite missa est
Nineteenth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm. 77: 1
SALUS pópuli ego sum, dicit Dóminus: de quacúmque tribulatióne clamáverint ad me, exáudiam eos: et ero illórum Dóminus in perpétuum. Ps. Atténdite, pópule meus, legem meam: inclinàte aurem vestram in verba oris mei. Glória Patri.
[I am the salvation of the people, saith the Lord: in whatever tribulation they shall cry to Me, I will hear them; and I will be their Lord for ever. Ps. Attend, O My people, to My law; incline your ears to the words of My mouth. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
OMNÍPOTENS et miséricors Deus, univérsa nobis adversántia propitiátus exclúde: ut mente et córpore páriter expedíti, quæ tua sunt, líberis méntibus exsequámur. Per Dóminum.
[Almighty and merciful God, in Thy goodness keep us, we beseech Thee, from all things hurtful; that we, being ready both in body and soul, may accomplish those things which belong to Thy service. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Eph. 4: 23-28
FRATRES: Renovámini spíritu mentis vestræ, et indúite novum hóminem, qui secúndum Deum creátus est in justítia et sanctitáte veritátis. Propter quod deponéntes mendácium, loquímini veritátem unusquísque cum próximo suo: quóniam sumus ínvicem membra. Irascímini, et nolíte peccáre: sol non óccidat super iracúndiam vestram. Nolíte locum dare diábolo: qui furabátur, jam non furétur, magis atem labóret, operándo mánibus suis, quod bonum est, ut hábeat unde tríbuat necessitátem patiénti.
[Brethren: Be ye renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, who according to God is created in justice and holiness of truth. Wherefore, putting away lying, speak ye the truth every man with his neighbor, for we are members one of another. Be angry, and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your anger. Give not place to the devil. He that stole, let him now steal no more: but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have something to give to him that suffereth need.]
GRADUAL - Ps 140: 2
DIRIGÁTUR orátio mea, sicut incénsum in conspéctu tuo, Dómine. Elevátio mánuum meárum sacrifícium vespertínum.
[Let my prayer be directed as incense in Thy sight, O Lord. The lifting up of my hands as evening sacrifice.]
ALLELUIA - Ps. 104: 1
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Confitémini Dómino, et invocáte nomen ejus: annuntiáte inter gentes ópera ejus. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Give glory to the Lord, and call upon His name: declare His deeds among the nations. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 22: 1-14
IN illo témpore: Loquebátur Jesus princípibus sacerdótum et pharisæis in parábolis dicens: Símile factum est regnum cælórum hómini regi, qui fecit núptias fílio suo. Et misit servos suos vocáre invitátos ad núptias, et nolébant veníre. Iterum misit álios servos, dicens: Dícite invitátis: Ecce prándium meum parávi, tauri mei et altília occísa sunt, et ómnia paráta: veníte ad núptias. Illi autem neglexérunt: et abiérunt, álius in villam suam, álius vero ad negotiatiónem suam: réliqui vero tenuérunt servos ejus, et contuméliis afféctos occidérunt. Rex autem cum audísset, irátus est: et, missis exercítibus suis, pérdidit homicídas illos et civitátem illórum succéndit. Tunc ait servis suis: Núptiæ quidem parátæ sunt, sed qui invitáti erant, non fué runt digni. Ite ergo ad éxitus viárum et quoscumque invenéritis vocáte ad núptias. Et egréssi servi ejus in vias, congregavérunt omnes quos invenérunt, malos et bonos: et implétæ sunt núptiæ discumbéntium. Intrávit autem rex ut vidéret discumbéntes, et vidit ibi hóminem non vestítum veste nuptiáli. Et ait illi: Amíce, quómodo huc intrásti non habens vestem nuptiálem? At ille obmútuit. Tunc dixit rex minístris: Ligátis mánibus et pédibus ejus, míttite eum in ténebras exterióres: ibi erit fletus et stridor déntium. Multi enim sunt vocáti, pauci vero elécti.
[At that time: Jesus spoke to the chief priests and the Pharisees in parables, saying: The kingdom of heaven is likened to a king, who made a marriage for his son; and he sent his servants, to call them that were invited to the marriage, and they would not come. Again he sent other servants, saying: Tell them that were invited: Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my beeves and fatlings are killed, and all things are ready; come ye to the marriage. But they neglected: and went their ways, one to his farm, and another to his merchandise; and the rest laid hands on his servants, and having treated them contumeliously, put them to death. But when the king had heard of it, he was angry; and sending his armies, he destroyed those murderers, and burnt their city. Then he saith to his servants: The marriage indeed is ready, but they that were invited were not worthy. Go ye therefore into the highways, and as many as you shall find, call to the marriage. And his servants going forth into the ways, gathered together all that they found, both bad and good; and the marriage was filled with guests. And the king went in to see the guests; and he saw there a man who had not a wedding garment: and he saith to him: Friend, how camest thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment? but he was silent. Then the king said to the waiters: Bind his hands and feet, and cast him into the exterior darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. For many are called, but few are chosen.]
OFFERTORY - Ps. 137: 7
SANCTIFICÁVIT Móyses altáre Dómino, ófferens super illud holocáusta, et ímmolans víctimas: fecit sacrifícium vespertínum in odórem suavitátis Dómino Deo, in conspéctu fíliórum Israël.
[Moses consecrated an altar to the Lord, offering upon it holocausts, and sacrificing victims: he made an evening sacrifice to the Lord God for an odor of sweetness, in the sight of the children of Israel.]
SECRET
DEUS, qui nos, per hujus sacrifícii veneránda commércia, uníus summæ divinitátis partícipes éfficis: præsta, quæsumus: ut, sicut tuam cognóscimus veritátem, sic eam dig nis móribus assequámur. Per Dóminum.
[O God who, through the venerable intercourse of this sacrifice dost make us partakers of the one supreme Godhead: grant, we beseech Thee, that having come to the knowledge of Thy truth, we may obtain it by worthy lives. Through the same Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 118: 4-5
TU mandásti mandáta tua custódiri nimis: útinam dirigántur viæ meæ, ad custodiéndas justificatiónes tuas.
[Thou hast commanded Thy commandments to be kept most diligently: O that my ways may be directed to keep Thy justifications.]
POSTCOMMUNION
TUA nos, Dómine, medicinális operátio, et a nostris perversitátibus cleménter expédiat, et tuis semper fáciat inhærére mandátis. Per Dóminum.
[May the healing power of Thy grace, O Lord, mercifully rid us of all perversity of heart, and make us ever cleave to Thy commandments. Through the same Lord.]
Ite missa est
Twentieth Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Dan. 3: 31, 29, 35; Ps. 118: 1
OMNIA, quæ fecisti nobis, Dómine, in vero judício fecístì, quia peccávimus tibi, et mandátis tuis non obedívimus: sed da glóriam nómini tuo, et fac nobíscum secúndum multitúdinem misericórdiæ tuæ. Ps. Beáti immaculáti in via: qui ámbulant in lege Dómini. V. Gloria Patri.
[All that Thou hast done to us, O Lord, Thou hast done in true judgment: because we have sinned against Thee, and we have not obeyed Thy commandments: but give glory to Thy Name, and deal with us according to the multitude of Thy mercy. Ps. Blessed are the undefiled in the way who walk in the law of the Lord. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
LARGÍRE, quæsumus Dómine, fidélibus tuis indulgéntiam placátus, et pacem: ut páriter ab ómnibus mundéntur offénsis, et secúra tibi mente desérviant. Per Dóminum.
[In Thy mercy, we beseech Thee, O Lord, grant to Thy faithful people pardon and peace, that they may be cleansed from all their sins and also serve Thee with a quiet mind. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Eph. 5: 15-21
FRATRES: Vidéte quomodo caute ambulétis: non quasi insipiéntes, sed ut sapiéntes: rediméntes tempus, quoniam dies, mali sunt. Proptérea nolíte fieri imprudéntes, sed intelligéntes quæ sit volúntas Dei. Et nolíte inebríari vino, in quo est luxúria, sed implémini Spíritu Sancto, loquéntes vobismetípsis in psalmis, et hymnis, et cáncticis spirituálibus, cantántes, et psalléntes in córdibus vestris Dómino, grátias agéntes semper pro ómnibus, in nómine Dómini nostri Jesu Christi Deo et Patri. Subjécti invícem in timóre Christi.
[Brethren: See how you walk circumspectly, not as unwise, but as wise redeeming the time, because the days are evil. Wherefore, become not unwise, but understanding what is the will of God. And be not drunk with wine, wherein is luxury but be ye filled with the Holy Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns, and spiritual canticles, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord, giving thanks always for all things, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God and the Father being subject one to another in the fear of Christ.]
GRADUAL - Ps 144: 15-16
OCULI ómnium in te sperant, Dómine: et tu das illia escam in témpore opportúno. Aperis tu manum tuam, et imples omni ánimal benedictióne.
[The eyes of all hope in Thee, O Lord and Thou givest them meat in due season. Thou openest Thy hand, and fillest every living creature with Thy blessing.]
ALLELUIA - Ps. 107: 2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Parátum cor meum, Deus, parátum cor meum, cantábo, et psallam tibi, glória mea. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. My heart is ready, O God my heart is ready: I will sing, and will give praise to Thee, my glory. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - John 4: 46-53
IN illo témpore: Erat quidam régulus, cujus fílius infirmabátur Caphárnaum. Hic cum audísset, quia Jesus adveníret a Judæa in Galilæam, ábiit ad eum: et rogábat eum ut descénderet et sanáret fílium ejus: incipiébat enim mori. Dixit ergo Jesus ad eum: Nisi signa, et prodígia vidéritis, non créditis. Dicit ad eum régulus: Dómine, descénde priúsquam moriétur fílius meus. Dicit ei Jesus: Vade fílius tuus vivit. Crédidit homo sermóni, quem dixit ei Jesus, et ibat. Jam autem eo descendéntem, servi occurrérunt eí, et nuntiavérunt dicéntes, quìa fílius ejus víveret. Interrogábat ergo horam ab eis, in qua mélius habúerit. Et dixérunt ei: Quia heri hora séptima reliquit eum febris. Cognóvit ergo pater, quia illa hora erat, in qua dixit ei Jesus: Fílius tuus vivit: et crédidit ipse, et domus ejus tota.
[At that time, there was a certain ruler whose son was sick at Capharnaum. He having heard that Jesus was come from Judæa into Galilee, went to Him, and prayed Him to come down, and heal his son for he was at the point of death. Jesus therefore said to him: Unless you see signs and wonders, you believe not. The ruler saith to Him: Lord, come down before my son die. Jesus saith to him: Go on thy way, thy son liveth. The man believed the word which Jesus had said to him, and went his way. And as he was going down, his servants met him, and they brought word, saying that his son lived. He asked therefore of them the hour wherein he grew better. And they said to him: Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him. The father therefore knew that it was at the same hour that Jesus said to him: Thy son liveth and himself believed, and his whole house.]
OFFERTORY - Psalm 136: 1
SUPER flumina Babylónis illic sédimus, et flevimus, dum recordarémur tui, Sion.
[Upon the rivers of Babylon there we sat, and wept; when we remembered thee, O Sion.]
SECRET
CÆLÉSTEM nobis præbeant hæc mysteria, quæsumus Dómine, medicínam: et vitia nostri cordis expúrgent. Per Dóminum.
[May these mysteries, we beseech Thee, O Lord, provide us with a Heavenly remedy: and purge our hearts from their vices. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 118: 49,58
MEMÉNTO verbi tui servo tuo, Dómíne, in quo mihí spem dedísti: hæc me consoláta est in humilitáte mea.
[Be Thou mindful of Thy word to Thy servant, O Lord, in which Thou hast given me hope: this hath comforted me in my humiliation.]
POSTCOMMUNION
UT sacris, Dómine, reddámur digni munéribus: fac nos, quæsumus, tuis semper obedíre mandátis. Per Dóminum nostrum Jesum Christum.
[That we may be made worthy, O Lord, of these holy gifts: make us, we beseech Thee, ever to obey Thy commandments. Through the same Lord Jesus Christ.]
Ite missa est
Twenty-first Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Esther 13: 9, 10, 11
IN voluntáte Tua, Dómine, univérsa sunt pósita, et non est qui possit resístere voluntáti tuæ: tu enim fecísti ómnia, cœlium et terram, et univérsa quæ cœli ámbitu continéntur: Dóminus universórum tu es. Ps. 118: 1. Beáti immaculáti in via: qui ámbulant in lege Dómini. V. Gloria Patri.
[All things are in Thy will, O Lord; and there is none that can resist Thy will: for Thou hast made all things, heaven and earth, and all things that are under the cope of heaven: Thou art Lord of all. Ps. Blessed are the undefiled who walk in the way: who walk in the law of the Lord. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
FAMÍLIAM tuam quæsumus, Dómine, contínua pietáte custódi: ut a cunctis adversitátibus, te protegénte, sit líbera: et in bonis áctibus tuo nómini sit devóta. Per Dóminum.
[O Lord, we beseech Thee, to keep Thy household in continual godliness that, through Thy protection, it may be free from all adversities, and devotedly given to serve Thee in good works to the glory of Thy Name. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Ephesians 6: 10-17
FRATRES: Confortámini in Dómino, et in poténtia virtútis ejus. Indúite vos armatúram Dei, ut possítis stare advérsus insídias diáboli. Quóniam non est nobis colluctátio advérsus carnem et sánguinem: sed advérsus príncipes, et potestátes, advérsus mundi rectóres tenebrárum harum, contra spirituália nequítiæ, in cœléstibus. Proptérea accípite armatúram Dei, ut possítis resístere in die malo, et in ómnibus perfécti stare. State ergo succíncti lumbos vestros in veritáte, et indúti lorícam justítiæ, et calceáti pedes in præparatióne Evangéii pacis: in omnibus summéntes scutum fidei, in quo possítis ómnia tela nequíssimi ignea exstínguere: et gáleam salútís assúmite: et gládium spiritus, quod est verbum Dei.
[Brethren: Be strengthened in the Lord, and in the might of His power. Put you on the armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the deceits of the devil. For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, against the rulers of the world of this darkness, against the spirits of wickedness in the high places. Therefore take unto you the armour of God, that you may be able to resist in the evil day, and to stand in all things perfect. Stand therefore having your loins girt about with truth, and having on the breastplate of justice, and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace in all things taking the shield of faith, wherewith you may be able to extinguish all the fiery darts of the most wicked one. And take unto you the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 89: 1-2
DÓMINE, refùgium factus es nobis a generatióne et progénie. V. Priúsquam montes fíerent, aut formarétur terra et orbis: a sæculo, et usque in sæculum tu es Deus.
[Thou hast been our refuge from generation to generation. V. Before the mountains were made, or the earth and the world was formed from eternity and to eternity Thou art God.]
ALLELUIA - Ps. 113: 1
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. In exitu Israël de Ægypto, domus Jacob de pópulo bárbaro. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a barbarous people. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 18: 23-35
IN illo témpore: Dixit Jesus discípulis suis parábolam hanc: Assimulátum est regnum cœlórum hóminí regi, qui vóluit ratiónem ponere cum servis suis. Et cum cœpisset ratiónem pónere, oblátus est ei unus, qui debébat ei decem míllia talénta. Cum autem non habéret unde rédderet, jussit eum dóminus ejus venúmdari, et uxórem ejus, et fílios, et ómnia quæ habébat, et reddi. Prócidens autem servus ille, orábat eum, dicens: Patiéntiam habe in me, et ómnia reddam tibi. Misértus autem dóminus servi illíus, dímisit eum, et débitum dimísit ei. Egréssus autem servus ille, invénit unum de consérvis sui, qui debébat ei centum denários: et tenens suffocábat eum, dicens: Redde quod debes. Et prócídens consérvus ejus, rogábat eum, dicens: Patiéntiam habe in me, et ómnia reddam tibi. Ille autem nóluit sed ábiit, et misit eum in cárcerem donec rédderet débitum. Vidéntes autem consérvi ejus quæ fiébant, contristáti sunt valde: et venérunt, et narravérunt dómino suo ómnia, quæ facta fúerant. Tunc vocávit ilium dóminus suus, et ait ilii: Serve nequam, omne débitum dimisi tibi, quóniam rogásti me: nonne ergo opórtuit et te miseréri consérvi tui, sicut et ego tui misértus sum? Et irátus dóminus ejus, trádidit eum tortóribus, quoadúsque rédderet univérsum débitum. Sic et Pater Meus Cœléstis fáciet vobis, si non remiséritis unusquísque fratri suo de córdibus vestris.
[At that time, Jesus spoke to His disciples this parable: The kingdom of Heaven is likened to a king, who would take an account of his servants. And when he had begun to take the account, one was brought to him that owed him ten thousand talents: and as he had not wherewith to pay it, his lord commanded that he should be sold, and his wife and children, and all that he had, and payment be made. But that servant falling down, besought him saying: Have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. And the lord of that servant, being moved with pity, let him go and forgave him the debt. But when that servant was gone out, he found one of his fellow servants that owed him a hundred pence: and laying hold of him, he throttled him, saying: Pay what thou owest. And his fellow-servant falling down besought him, saying: have patience with me, and I will pay thee all. And he would not but went and cast him into prison till he paid the debt. Now his fellow servants, seeing what was done, were very much grieved and they came and told their lord all that was done. Then his lord called him and saith to him: Thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all the debt, because thou besoughtest me; shouldst not thou have had compassion also on thy fellow-servant, even as I had compassion on thee? And his lord being angry, delivered him to the torturers, until he paid all the debt. So also shall my Heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not every one his brother from your hearts.]
OFFERTORY - Job 1
VIR erat in terra Hus nómine Job: simplex et rectus ac timens Deum: quem Satan pétiit, ut tentáret: et data est ei potéstas a Dómino in facultátes, et in carnem ejus: perdiditque omnem substántiam ipsíus, et fílios: carnem quoque ejus gravi úlcere vulnerávit.
[There was a man in the land of Hus, whose name was Job, simple, and upright, and fearing God: whom Satan besought that he might tempt: and power was given him from the Lord over his possessions and his flesh; and he destroyed all his substance and his children; and wounded his flesh also with a grievous ulcer.]
SECRET
SÚSCIPE, Dómine, propítius hóstias: quibus et te placári voluísti, et nobis salútem poténti pietáte restítuti. Per Dóminum.
[Mercifully receive, O Lord, these offerings, by which Thou art pleased to be appeased and in Thy powerful goodness to restore our salvation. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 118: 81, 84 86
IN salutári tuo ánima mea, et in verbum tuum sperávi: quando fácies de persequéntibus me judícium? Iniqui persecúti sunt me, ádjuva me, Dómine Deus meus.
[My soul is in Thy salvation, and in Thy word have I hoped: when wilt Thou execute judgment on them that persecute me? the wicked have persecuted me: help me, O Lord my God.]
POSTCOMMUNION
IMMORTALITÁTIS alimóniam consecúti, quæsumus Dómine: ut, quod ore percépimus, pura mente sectémur. Per Dóminum.
[We who have received the Food of immortality, beseech Thee, O Lord: that what we have taken with our mouth, we may follow after with a pure mind. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
Twenty-second Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Psalm 129: 3-4
SI iniquitátes observáveris, Dómine, Dómìne, quis sustinébit? quía apud te propitátio est, Deus Israël. Ps. 129: 1, 2. De profúndis clamávi ad te, Dómíne: Dómine, exáudì vocem meam. V. Gloria Patri.
[If Thou shalt observe iniquities, O Lord, Lord, who shall endure it? for with Thee is propitiation, O God of Israel. Ps. From the depths I have cried to Thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my voice. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
DEUS, refúgium nostrum, et virtus: adésto piis Ecclésiæ Tuæ précibus, auctor ipse pietátis, et præsta: ut quod fidéliter pétimus, efficáciter consequámur. Per Dóminum.
[O God, our refuge and our strength, give ear to the holy prayers of Thy Church, and grant, that what we ask with faith, we may effectually obtain. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Philippians 1: 6-11
FRATRES: Confídimus in Dómino Jesu, quia qui cœpit in vobis opus bonum, perfíciet usque in diem Christi Jesu. Sicut est mihi justum hoc sentíre pro ómnibus vobis: eo quod hábeam vos in corde, et in vínculis meis, et in defensióne, et confirmatióne Evangélii, sócios; gáudii mei omnes vos esse. Testis enim mihi est Deus, quómodo cúpiam omnes vos in viscéribus Jesu Christi. Et hoc oro, ut cáritas vestra magis ac magis abúndet in sciéntia, et in omni sensu: ut probétis potióra, ut sitis sincéri, et sine offénsa in diem Christi, repléti fructu justítiæ per Jesum Christum, in glóriam et laudem Dei.
[Brethren, we are confident of this very thing, that He Who hath begun a good work in you, will perfect it unto the day of Christ Jesus. As it is meet for me to think this for you all: for that I have you in my heart and that, in my bands, and in the defense and confirmation of the Gospel, you are all partakers of my joy. For God is my witness, how I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. And this I pray, that your charity may more and more abound in knowledge and in all understanding that you may approve the better things, that you may be sincere and without offense unto the day of Christ, filled with the fruits of justice, through Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 132: 1-2
ECCE quam bonum, et quam jucúndum, habitáre fratres in unum! V. Sicut ungúentum in cápite, quod descéndit in barbam, barbam Aaron.
[Behold how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity. V. It is like the precious ointment on the head, that ran down upon the beard, the beard of Aaron.]
ALLELUIA - Ps. 113: 11
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. Qui timent Dóminum, sperent in eo adjútor et protéctor eórum est. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. Let them that fear the Lord, hope in Him; He is their helper and their protector. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 22: 15-21
IN illo témpore: Abeúntes pharisæi, consilium iniérunt ut cáperent Jesum in sermóne. Et mittunt ei discípulos suos cum Herodiánis, dicéntes: Magíster, scimus quia verax es, et viam Dei in veritáte doces, est non et tibi cura de áliquo: non enim réspicis persónam hóminum: dic ergo nobis, quid tibi vidétur: licet censum dare Cæsari, an non? Cógnita autem Jesus nequítia eórum, ait: Quid me tentátis, hypócritæ? osténdite mihi numísma census. At illi obtulérunt ei denárium. Et ait illis Jesus: Cujus est imágo hæc, et superscríptio? Dicunt ei: Cæsaris. Tunc ait illis: Réddite ergo quæ sunt Cæsaris, Cæsari: et quæ sunt Dei, Deo.
[At that time, the Pharisees went and consulted among themselves, how to ensnare Jesus in His speech. And they sent to Him their disciples, with the Herodians, Saying: Master, we know that Thou art a true speaker, and teachest the way of God in truth, neither carest Thou for any man, for Thou dost not regard the person of men. Tell us therefore, what dost Thou think? Is it lawful to give tribute to Caesar, or not? But Jesus knowing their wickedness, said: Why do you tempt Me, you hypocrites? Show Me the coin of the tribute. And they offered Him a penny. And Jesus saith to them: Whose image and superscription is this? They say to Him: Caesar's. Then He saith to them: Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.]
OFFERTORY - Esther 14: 12,13
RECORDÁRE mei, Dómine, omni potentátui dóminans: et da sermónem rectum in os meum, ut pláceant verba mea in conspéctu príncipis.
[REMEMBER me, O Lord, Thou Who rulest above all power; and give a well-ordered speech in my mouth, that my words may be pleasing in the sight of the prince.]
SECRET
DA, miséricors Deus: ut hæc salutáris oblátio, et a própriis nos reátibus indesinéntur expédiat, et ab ómnibus tueátur advérsis. Per Dóminum.
[Grant unto us, O merciful God, that this saving oblation may unceasingly free us from our own guilty deeds, and keep us from all things that may hurt us. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Psalm 118: 81, 84, 86
EGO clamávi quóniam exaudísti me, Deus: inclína aurem tuam, et exáudi verba mea.
[I have cried, for Thou, O God, hast heard me: O incline Thine ear unto me, and hear my words.]
POSTCOMMUNION
SÚMPSIMUS, Dómine, sacri dona mystérii, humíliter deprecántes: ut qua in tui commemoratiónem nos fácere præcepísti, in nostræ profícient infirmitátis auxílium. Qui vivis et regnas.
[We have received, O Lord, the gifts of this sacred Mystery, and humbly beseech Thee: that what Thou hast bidden us to do in memory of Thee may avail us in our weakness. Who livest and reignest.]
Ite missa est
Twenty-third Sunday after Pentecost
INTROIT - Jer. 29. 11, 12, 14
DICIT Dóminus: Ego cógito cogitatiónes pacis, et non afflictiónis: invocábitis me, et ego exáudiam vos: et redúcam captivitátem vestram de cunctis locis. Ps. 84. 2. Benedixísti, Dómine, terram tuam: avertísti captivitátem Jacob. V. Gloria Patri.
[The Lord saith: I think thoughts of peace, and not of affliction: you shall call upon Me, and I will hear you; and I will bring back your captivity from all places. Ps. Lord, Thou hast blessed Thy land: Thou hast turned away the captivity of Jacob. V. Glory be to the Father.]
Kyrie
Gloria
COLLECT
ABSÓLVE, quæsumus, Dómine, tuórum delícta populórum: ut a peccatórum néxibus, quæ pro nostra fragilitáte contráximus, tua benignitáte liberémur. Per Dóminum.
[Absolve, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the sins of Thy people; that we may be delivered by Thy goodness from the bonds of sins, which by our frailty we have committed. Through our Lord.]
EPISTLE - Philippians 3. 17-21; 4. 1-3
FRATRES: Imitatóres mei estóte, et observáte eos qui ita ámbulant, sicut habétis formam nostram. Multi enim ámbulant, quos sæpe dicébam vobis (nunc autem et flens dico) inimícos crucis Christi: quorum finis intéritus: quorum Deus venter est: et glória in confusióne ipsórum, qui terréna sápiunt. Nostra autem conversátio in cœlis est: unde étiam Salvatórem exspectámus Dóminum nostrum Jesum Christum, qui reformábit corpus humilitátis nostræ, configurátum córporis claritátis suæ, secúndum operatiónem, qua étiam possit subjícere sibi ómnia. Itaque, fratres mei caríssimi et desideratíssimi, gáudium meum et coróna mea; sic state in Dómino, caríssimi. Evódiam, rogo et Sýntychen déprecor idípsum sápere in Dómino. Etiam rogo et te, germáne compar, ádjuva illas, quæ mecum laboravérunt in Evangélio cum Cleménte et céteris adjutóribus meis, quorum nómina sunt in libro vitæ.
[Brethren, be followers of me, and observe them who walk so as you have our model. For many walk, of whom I have told you often (and now tell you weeping) that they are enemies of the cross of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame; who mind earthly things. But our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for the Savior, our Lord Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of our lowness, made like to the body of His glory, according to the operation whereby also He is able to subdue all things unto Himself. Therefore, my brethren, dearly beloved, and most desired, my joy and my crown: so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved: I beg of Evodia, and I beseech Syntyche to be of one mind in the Lord: and I entreat thee also, my sincere companion; help those women who have labored with me in the Gospel, with Clement and the rest of my fellow-laborers, whose names are in the book of life.]
GRADUAL - Psalm 43. 8-9
LIBERÁSTI nos, Dómine, ex affligéntibus nos: et eos, qui nos odérunt, confudísti. V. In Deo laudábimur tota die et in nómine tuo confitébimur in sæcula.
[Thou hast delivered us, O Lord, from them that afflict us: and hast put them to shame that hate us. V. In God we will glory all the day: and in Thy name we will give praise for ever.]
ALLELUIA - Psalm 129. 1-2
ALLELÚIA, allelúia. V. De profúndis clamávi ad te, Dómine: Dómine, exáudi oratiónem meam. Allelúia.
[Alleluia, alleluia. V. From the depths I have cried to Thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my prayer. Alleluia.]
GOSPEL - Matthew 9. 18-26
IN illo témpore: Loquénte Jesu ad turbas, ecce princeps unus accéssit, et adorábat eum, dicens: Dómine, fília mea modo defúncta est: sed veni, impóne manum tuam super eam, et vivet. Et surgens Jesus sequebátur eum, et discípuli ejus. Et ecce múlier, quæ sánguinis fluxum patiebátur duódecim annis, accéssit retro, et tétigit fímbriam vestiménti ejus. Dicébat enim intra se: Si tetígero tantum vestiméntum ejus, salva ero. At Jesus convérsus et videns eam, dixit: Confíde, fília, fides tua te salvam fecit. Et salva facta est múlier ex illa hora. Et cum venísset Jesus in domum príncipis, et vidísset tibícines et turbam tumultuántem, dicébat: Recédite: non est enim mórtua puélla, sed dormit. Et deridébant eum. Et cum ejécta esset turba, intrávit et ténuit manum ejus. Et surréxit puélla. Et éxiit fama hæc in univérsam terram illam.
[At that time, as Jesus was speaking to the multitudes, behold a certain ruler came up, and adored Him, saying: Lord, my daughter is even now dead; but come lay Thy hand upon her, and she shall live. And Jesus, rising up, followed him, with His disciples. And behold a woman, who was troubled with an issue of blood twelve years, came behind Him, and touched the hem of His garment. For she said within herself: If I shall touch only His garment, I shall be healed. But Jesus turning and seeing her, said: Be of good heart, daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was made whole from that hour. And when Jesus was come into the house of the ruler, and saw the minstrels and the multitude making a tumult, He said: Give place; for the girl is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed Him to scorn. And when the multitude was put forth, He went in, and took her by the hand. And the maid arose. And the fame thereof went abroad into all that country.]
OFFERTORY - Ps 129. 1-2
DE profúndis clamávi ad te, Dómine: Dómine, exáudi oratiónem meam: de profúndis clamávi ad te, Dómine.
[From the depths I have cried out to Thee, O Lord: Lord, hear my prayer: from the depths I have cried out to Thee, O Lord.]
SECRET
PRO nostræ servitútis augmento sacrifícium tibi, Dómine, laudis offérimus: ut, quod imméritis contulísti, propítius exsequáris. Per Dóminum.
[We offer to Thee, O Lord, this sacrifice of praise to increase our zeal in Thy service: that what Thou hast begun in us Thy unworthy servants, Thou wouldst mercifully bring to completion. Through our Lord.]
Preface of the Most Holy Trinity
Sanctus
Agnus Dei
COMMUNION - Mark 11. 24
AMEN dico vobis, quidquid orántes pétitis, crédite quia accipiétis, et fiet vobis.
[Amen I say to you, whatsoever you ask when you pray, believe that you shall receive, and it shall be done to you.]
POSTCOMMUNION
QUÆSUMUS, omnípotens Deus: ut, quos divína tríbuis participatióne gaudére, humánis non sinas subjacére perículis. Per Dóminum.
[We beseech Thee, almighty God, that Thou wouldst not permit us to be subject to human dangers, to whom Thou givest to rejoice in the participation of divine mysteries. Through our Lord.]
Ite missa est
